
===== page 1 =====
Variational Tetrahedral Meshing
Pierre Alliez
INRIA
David Cohen-Steiner
INRIA
Mariette Yvinec
INRIA
Mathieu Desbrun
Caltech
Abstract
In this paper, a novel Delaunay-based variational approach to
isotropic tetrahedral meshing is presented. To achieve both robust-
ness and efciency, we minimize a simple mesh-dependent energy
through global updates of both vertex positions and connectivity.
As this energy is known to be the L1 distance between an isotropic
quadratic function and its linear interpolation on the mesh, our min-
imization procedure generates well-shaped tetrahedra. Mesh design
is controlled through a gradation smoothness parameter and selec-
tion of the desired number of vertices. We provide the foundations
of our approach by explaining both the underlying variational prin-
ciple and its geometric interpretation. We demonstrate the quality
of the resulting meshes through a series of examples.
Keywords: Isotropic meshing,Delaunay mesh,sizing eld,slivers.
1 Introduction
Three-dimensional simplicial mesh generation aims at tiling a
bounded 3D domain with tetrahedra so that any two of them are
either disjoint or sharing a lower dimensional face. Such a dis-
cretization of space is required for most physically-based simula-
tion techniques: realistic simulation of deformable objects in com-
puter graphics, as well as more general numerical solvers for par-
tial differential equations in computational science, need a discrete
domain to apply nite-element or nite-volume methods. Most ap-
plications have specic requirements on the size and shape of sim-
plices in the mesh. Isotropic meshing is desirable in the common
case where nearly-regular tetrahedra (nearly-equal edge lengths)
are preferred.
Creating high quality tetrahedral meshes is a difcult task for a vari-
ety of reasons. First, the mere size of the resulting meshes requires
robust, disciplined data structures and algorithms. There are also
basic mathematical difculties which make tetrahedral meshing
signicantly harder than its 2D counterpart: the most isotropic 3D
simplex, the regular tetrahedron, does not tile 3D space (let alone
specic domains), while the equilateral triangle does tile the plane;
unlike the 2D case, even well-spaced vertices can create degenerate
3D elements such as slivers (see Fig.
2). Dealing with boundaries is
also fundamentally more difcult in 3D: while it always exists a 2D
triangulation conforming to any set of non intersecting constraints,
this is no longer true in 3D [Shewchuk 1998a]. All these facts ren-
der both the development of algorithms and suitable error analysis
for the optimal 3D meshing problem very challenging. Given that
one can often observe in applications that the worst element in the
domain dictates accuracy and/or efciency [Shewchuk 2002a], it is
clear that great care is required to design the underlying meshes and
ensure that they meet the desired quality standards.
1.1 Previous Work & Nomenclature
The meshing community has extensively studied a number of tech-
niques over the last 20 years. We do not aim at covering all previ-
Figure 1: Variational Tetrahedral Meshing: Given the boundary of a do-
main (here, a human torso), we automatically compute the local feature size
of this boundary as well as an interior sizing eld (left, cross-section), be-
fore constructing a mesh with a prescribed number of vertices (here 65K)
and a smooth gradation conforming to the sizing eld (right, cutaway view).
The resulting tetrahedra are all well-shaped (i.e., nearly regular).
ous work since comprehensive surveys are available [Carey 1997;
Owen 1998; Frey and George 2000; Teng et al. 2000; Eppstein
2001]. To motivate our work we briey review both the usual
nomenclature and the main difculties involved in isotropic tetra-
hedral mesh generation. Throughout tet will be the abbreviation for
tetrahedron.
Proper mesh generation requires a number of successive stages,
which are governed by a number of key factors:
 Shape Quality Measures: Element shape/size requirements are
typically application-dependent. Consequently, an extraordinar-
ily large number of quality measures has been proposed, ranging
from minimum or maximum bounds on dihedral or solid angles,
to more complex geometric ratios. We recommend [
Shewchuk
2002a] for a clear exposition of both the history behind these mea-
sures and their relation to (1) the conditioning of nite element
stiffness matrices and (2) the accuracy of linear interpolation of
functions and their gradients. Among the most popular quality
measures of a tet are the radius and radius-edge ratios. The lat-
ter measures the ratio between the circumsphere radius and the
shortest edge length. It is not a fair measure since it does not
approach zero for a class of degenerate tets called slivers (sliv-
ers result when four tet vertices are close to a great circle of a
sphere and spaced roughly equally along this circle, see Fig. 2).
The radius ratio, which takes the quotient of inscribed and cir-
cumscribed sphere radii (times three for normalization purposes),
is a good measure for any kind of degeneracy.
Figure 2: Tet shapes: the regular tet (leftmost) is well shaped, unlike the
other tets displayed: each represents a type of degeneracy. The rightmost
one with 4 near-cocircular vertices is usually referred to as a sliver.
 Sizing requirement: Accuracy and efciency of numerical
solvers depend on the local size of tets. Consequently, a sizing
eld, prescribing the ideal local edge length as a function of space,
===== page 2 =====
must be added. Obvious choices include the constant eld for a
uniform mesh, and a priori or a posteriori error estimators for sim-
ulations. To avoid bad dihedral angles in the simplices one typi-
cally requires the sizing eld to vary smoothly [Ruppert 1993].
 Boundary Requirements: Some approaches aim at conforming
to (i.e., matching exactly) the domain boundary by adding Steiner
points if necessary [Cohen-Steiner et al. 2002; Krysl and Ortiz
2001; Cheng and Poon 2003]. Others require of the mesh bound-
ary to only approximate the domain boundary. The latter allows
for higher tet quality since the boundary is not required to match
the input surface. In particular the latter is important when the
initial input is a low quality surface triangulation.
 Strategy: Existing meshing techniques can be roughly classied
by the general strategy they employ:
 Advancing front: Starting from the boundary of the domain,
new vertices are added by a local heuristic to ensure that the
generated tets have acceptable shapes and sizes and conform to
the desired sizing eld. Global optimization steps can also be
performed sporadically to improve the mesh quality further. A
number of variants exist, such as sphere or bubble packing [Li
et al. 2000], which provide better tet shape and size control al-
beit adding a signicant computational overhead.
 Octree-based methods: An octree is rst rened until each of
its leaves is either strictly inside or strictly outside of a nely
voxelized version of the domain. Proper connections of the in-
terior leaves through, for instance, a red-green strategy [Molino
et al. 2003] then ensure a good initial mesh of the domain, usu-
ally improved through optimization or physically-based relax-
ation in particular to better approximate the domain boundary.
Other similar methods offer bounds of worst dihedral angles
even without a relaxation stage [Mitchell and Vavasis 2000].
Unfortunately, octree-based meshes have preferred edge direc-
tions, which may be detrimental to subsequent use in simulation.
 Delaunay approaches: For a given set of sample points in
3D, its Delaunay triangulation has the canonical property of
minimizing the maximum radius of the minimum containment
sphere. This property is very useful in approximation theory:
this radius provides an upper bound on the L1 difference be-
tween any function f and its piecewise linear approximant, as-
suming f has bounded second derivatives. Thus a Delaunay
triangulation provides good control over the worst interpola-
tion error inside a domain. Consequently a large body of work
in numerical analysis provides error estimates for a variety of
applications using these meshes. Because of these as well as
many other optimality properties, mesh generation relying on
Delaunay triangulation such as Delaunay renement [Ruppert
1993; Shewchuk 1998b; Shewchuk 2002b; Cheng et al. 2004],
unit mesh [Borouchaki et al. 1997a; Borouchaki et al. 1997b],
or centroidal Voronoi tessellations [Du and Wang 2003] have
ourished in the meshing and Computational Geometry com-
munities. Delaunay renement methods offer some theoretical
guarantees on the resulting meshes: they provide bounds on the
radius-edge ratio, and are shown to be asymptotically optimal
with respect to the number of elements in the mesh. Delau-
nay renement, however, can generate slivers; some attempts
have been made to handle the sliver problem within Delaunay
renement [Cheng et al. 1999; Cheng and Dey 2002; Li and
Teng 2001]. Unfortunately the theoretical guarantees are quite
poor, and the mesh either is no longer Delaunay but a regu-
lar (weighted Delaunay) triangulation, or comes with degraded
bounds on the radius-edge ratio.
 Mesh Optimization Techniques: Even if fast and robust Delau-
nay triangulators are available, the previous strategies can re-
quire substantial implementation effort to make them robust to
arbitrary input domains. A large number of practical meshing
techniques instead employ local optimization methods which
Figure 3: Stanford bunny: meshing the interior of the bunny with adapted
tets (smaller near the boundary, larger inside, and smooth gradation (K =
1) in between). The cutaway views show the well-shapedness of the mesh
elements inside the domain; notice also the quality of the boundary mesh.
move vertices adjacent to poorly-shaped tets to improve mesh
quality. Coupled with local face swapping between adjacent tets
as well as tet insertions and deletions, these strategies can result
in nice nal meshes [Freitag and Ollivier-Gooch 1996; Cutler
et al. 2004]. Unfortunately, these optimizations often use highly
non-convex functionals and get easily stuck in local minima.
From this brief overview we see that meshing has been approached
with two very different emphases: theory and practice. Theoreti-
cal methods, most commonly using iterative Delaunay renement
approaches, come with quality guarantees that are often not suited
to further use in practical applications: the presence of fairly de-
generated tets are a serious problem for many numerical methods.
Alternatively, optimization methods provide viable solutions with
relatively little implementation effort, and the quality obtained is
satisfactory for a class of applications. Alas, their ad-hoc nature
does not warrant high-quality meshes. When seeking high qual-
ity meshes, a method combining optimization with solid theoreti-
cal foundations would provide the best of both worlds, promising
meshes of a quality that none of the existing approaches could ob-
tain by themselves.
1.2 Approach and Contributions
In this paper, we present a Delaunay-based optimization technique,
that we call Variational Tetrahedral Meshing, to efciently mesh
a bounded 3D domain 
 of arbitrary topology or number of con-
nected components. The domain boundary @
 is assumed to be a
manifold, watertight and intersection-free triangular mesh. Draw-
ing on recent work on surface approximation [Cohen-Steiner et al.
2004] and Optimal Delaunay Triangulations [Chen and Xu 2004],
we propose a simple minimization procedure that alternates global
3D Delaunay triangulation and local vertex relocation to consis-
tently and efciently minimize a global energy over the domain.
It results in a robust meshing technique that generates high qual-
ity isotropic meshes in terms of radius ratios, as well as angles.
A notable feature of the method is that it removes slivers inside
the domain. To provide a exible meshing tool, we also introduce
an automatic sizing eld construction that guarantees an arbitrary
smooth gradation of the mesh together with faithful approximation
of the domain boundary. Equipped with these tools, the user has full
control over the mesh design, and can require a specic number of
vertices for the nal mesh. We demonstrate the versatility and ro-
bustness of our method through a series of results and comparisons;
we also give details on the current limitations.
2 Variational Approach to Meshing
Variational approaches (that is, methods relying on energy mini-
mization) have been advocated as a powerful and robust tool in
===== page 3 =====
meshing both in graphics for triangle [Hoppe et al. 1993; Cohen-
Steiner et al. 2004] and tet [Molino et al. 2003; Cutler et al. 2004]
meshes and in mechanical engineering for volumetric meshes [Fre-
itag and Ollivier-Gooch 1996; Du and Wang 2003]. These methods
basically dene (often highly) non-convex energies that they mini-
mize through vertex displacements and/or connectivity changes in
the current mesh. Our method also falls into this broad category.
However, in contrast to earlier work, we use a simple quadratic
energy (which we analyze) and allow for global changes in mesh
connectivity during energy minimization. We will point out both
the theoretical and practical consequences of such a strategy. We
begin by motivating our choice of energy.
2.1 Consistent Energy Minimization
A few of these variational methods [Cohen-Steiner et al. 2004; Du
and Wang 2003] have an attractive theoretical property resulting
in remarkable results: vertex positions and connectivity updates
are performed alternately to minimize the same quadratic energy.
This specicity has rich consequences. First, each update can be
done optimally due to the simplicity of the energy used. Second,
assuming convexity of the boundary, the energy decreases mono-
tonically, implying eventual convergence. Lastly, since both opti-
mization steps minimize the same energy, their nal meshes have a
concrete, variational nature: the resulting meshes are (quasi) mini-
mizers of a “quality” functional.
Centroidal Voronoi Tessellations Du and Wang [2003] pro-
pose to generate meshes that are dual to optimal Voronoi diagrams.
These diagrams are achieved by minimizing the quadratic energy:
ECVT =
X
i=1::N
Z
Vi
jjx   xijj2dx (1)
where the xi are vertex positions and Vi a local cell associated with
each xi; the union of these cells forms a partition of the domain 
.
Du and Wang used Lloyd relaxation [Lloyd 1957] to robustly mini-
mize this energy: for a given set of vertices, compute their Voronoi
diagram (restricted to the domain 
) since it is the energetically op-
timal partition for the current vertex positions. In a second phase,
the partition is held xed and vertex positions xi are optimized.
Even though these steps of partitioning and vertex position opti-
mization are quite different in character, each of them decreases the
same energy. Du and Wang explain how a mesh that minimizes this
energy has each vertex at the centroid of its own Voronoi cell: hence
the name Centroidal Voronoi Tessellation (CVT). Aside from the
theoretical properties of CVTs, Du and Wang also note the superior
results they get in comparison to conventional Laplacian smooth-
ing (a widespread technique in graphics due to its simplicity, but
for which the associated energy only relies on edge length, not on
spatial distribution).
Figure 4: Nomenclature: Left: We denote by 
i the 1-ring of vertex xi.
Middle: Vi is the Voronoi cell of vertex xi. Right: The center of the circum-
circle of triangle Tj, is denoted cj, while its radius is denoted Rj.
¿From the analysis of ECVT it is well known that its minimiza-
tion corresponds to minimizing the volume between a paraboloid
f(x) = jjxjj2 and an underlaid, circumscribing piecewise linear
approximant f dual
PWL, which is formed by planar patches tangent to the
paraboloid (see Fig. 5(a)):
ECVT = jjf   f
dual
PWLjjL1:
In 2D, this approach will lead to isotropically sampled meshes
since it has been shown that any Lp optimal approximation of a
smooth function asymptotically tends to align and shape its ele-
ments according to the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of its Hes-
sian [Shewchuk 2002b]: since the Hessian of the quadratic function
f(x) = jjxjj2 is isotropic, the resulting meshes must have nearly
hexagonal Voronoi cells, i.e., nearly equilateral triangles in the dual
Delaunay mesh.
Unfortunately, and despite Du's proposal [2003] to use CVTs for tet
meshing, there exists no proof of such a dual property in 3D. Our
own tests show that using Du's suggestion for tet meshing gives rise
to numerous degenerate sliver tets (see Fig. 2). We can attribute the
slivers to the fact that ECVT tends to optimizes the compactness of
the dual Voronoi cells, but not the compactness of simplices in the
primal Delaunay triangulation: therefore, the presence of a sliver
is not penalized by this energy. In other words, this variational
approach ensures that the vertices in the domain are well spaced
(i.e., isotropic point sampling—see [Hardin and Saff 2004] for an
overview of this interesting problem); sadly, having well-spaced
vertices guarantees nothing in terms of the quality of the actual 3D
mesh [Eppstein 2001].
Optimal Delaunay Triangulations Recently, Chen [2004]
proposed an approach “dual” to the above in the context of mesh
optimization. He used the following energy:
EODT = jjf   f
primal
PWL jjL1;
i.e., the volume between a paraboloid and an overlaid, circumscrib-
ing piecewise linear approximant f
primal
PWL formed by a linear interpo-
lation of points on the paraboloid (see Fig. 5(b)). Chen made the
observation that changing the energy from ECVT to EODT amounts to
only a slight change in Eq. (1), turning it into:
EODT = 1
n + 1
X
i=1::N
Z

i
jjx   xijj2dx: (2)
The integral is now taken over each 1-ring region 
i (also called the
star of the vertex xi, see Fig. 4). Notice that these regions overlap.
These quadratic energies differ quite signicantly: Chen's EODT en-
ergy measures a quality of the simplicial mesh, not of its dual. It
is thus more prone to generate well-shaped primal elements, while
ECVT was maximizing the compactness of the dual Voronoi cells.
2
 2
Figure 5: PWL approximations: A paraboloid can be approximated by an
underlaid circumscribed PWL function (left), or by an overlaid one (right).
Although no formal guarantee on the resulting meshes is given
in [Chen and Xu 2004], the 2D results presented are of high qual-
ity. The smoothing technique presented in [Chen 2004] updates the
mesh connectivity through only-local edge ips when an inverted
triangle is detected. Unfortunately, this local connectivity optimiza-
tion in the 2D triangle case does not carry over to 3D: there is no
theorem proving that an arbitrary mesh is only a few ips away
from the optimal connectivity.
2.2 Our Variational Approach
We propose an algorithm to consistently minimize the primal en-
ergy EODT. This is achieved not just through a smoothing procedure
(as suggested in [Chen 2004]), but through a full-blown minimiza-
tion procedure for both vertex positions and connectivity.
===== page 4 =====
Figure 6: Complex Topology: As stressed in this paper, our approach can
as well mesh complex domains with arbitrary genus. Four nested spheres
dene a multi-layer object (top); a bunny immersed in a sphere (bottom).
Optimizing Connectivity Connectivity optimization is easily
achieved: for a given set of vertex positions xi, its Delaunay tri-
angulation is again (remarkably!) the optimal connectivity which
minimizes EODT (as shown in [Chen and Xu 2004]) just as it is
optimal for ECVT. Therefore, we compute the (global) Delaunay
connectivity systematically, guaranteeing optimality of the connec-
tivity at each iteration.
Optimizing Vertex Positions One can show that for a given
mesh M with vertices xi's, EODT can be written as:
EODT = 1
4
X
i
xi
2j
ij  
Z
M
x2dx; (3)
where j
ij is the measure (volume in 3D) of the 1-ring neighbor-
hood of vertex xi (Appendix B gives a short proof). Noting that the
last term is constant given a xed boundary @M, a simple deriva-
tion of this quadratic energy in xi leads to the following optimal
position x?
i of the interior vertex xi in its 1-ring:
x?
i =   1
2 j
ij
X
Tj 2
i
0
B
B
@rxi jTjj
h X
xk 2 Tj
xk 6= xi
jjxkjj2
i
1
C
C
A: (4)
The term rxi jTjj is the gradient of the volume of the tet Tj with
respect to xi. Replacing function f(x) = jjxjj2 by the translated
function f(x) = jjx xijj2, which has the same interpolation error
and thus leads to the same optimal position, we get the following
equivalent expression used to update a vertex position :
x?
i = xi   1
2 j
ij
X
Tj 2
i
0
@rxi jTjj
h X
xk2Tj
jjxi   xkjj2
i
1
A: (5)
Geometric and Physical Interpretations As shown in the
Appendix
C, we can express the latter optimality condition in more
obvious geometric terms, to further our understanding of the bene-
ts of this variational approach:
x?
i = 1
j
ij
X
Tj 2
i
jTjjcj: (6)
where cj is the circumcenter of tet Tj (see Fig. 4). This last expres-
sion shows that, although we move each vertex to a local average,
the optimal placement heavily depends on the local distribution.
For instance, if all the 1-ring neighbors are on a common sphere,
the optimal position will be the sphere center. In fact, as evidenced
by Eq. 4, this optimal location depends only on the 1-ring neigh-
bors, not on the current location. Note also the similarities with the
generalized barycentric coordinates in the Voronoi polytope pro-
posed in [Warren et al. 2004].
If we further transform the energy (see Appendix B), we get:
EODT=
X
j
 
jTjjR2
j  
Z
Tj
jjx cjjj2dx

= 2
X
j
jMSj  MTj j (7)
where MTj is the sum of the principal moments (i.e., the trace of
the inertia tensor) of the tet Tj w.r.t. the circumcenter cj, while
MSj is the same quantity for the circumshell Sj of equivalent mass
(i.e., a shell in the shape of the circumsphere, with the same mass
as tet Tj). Minimizing this energy amounts to make the average
moment of inertia of each tet match the one of its circumshell of
equivalent mass. Even Eq. (6) can be re-expressed in terms of these
circumshells: a vertex is moved at the barycenter of its neighboring
circumshells, which is reminiscent of the CVT property, this time
on the primal mesh. We believe that these series of observations
provide further insights on this simple quadratic energy, and how it
relates to the well-shapedness of the resulting tets. It also provides a
straightforward generalization to graded meshing as explained next.
2.3 Extension to Graded Meshes
Since the previous expressions only apply to uniform meshing,
we extend the optimality condition next to allow for more exible
meshing capacities. For this purpose, we will make use of a sizing
eld  as a roadmap to the desired tet sizes within the domain.
Generalized Optimality Conditions Eq. (6) gives us a
straightforward means to extend the previous approach to create
graded meshes. One can simply dene a mass density in space, and
use it in computing the inertia tensors. This density should agree
with the sizing eld, i.e., the locally-desired size of a tet. To sim-
plify the computations, we use a one-point approximation of the
sizing eld  in a tet and dene the mass density as being 1=3
since the local volume of a tet should be roughly the cube of the
ideal edge size. Thus, we modify the optimality condition of a ver-
tex as follows:
x?
i = 1
P
Tk2
i
jTkj
3(gk)
X
Tj 2
i
jTjj
3(gj) cj: (8)
where gk is the centroid of Tk. A formal integration of the siz-
ing eld within each tet would provide more precision. However
it would also signicantly affect the computational cost without a
drastic change in the results thanks to our choice of sizing eld (de-
scribed next). Finally, we keep the Delaunay triangulation (of the
new point positions) as the optimal connectivity.
Automatic Design of Sizing Field The sizing eld can be
virtually any function tuned to the specic application needs. We
also want to provide a default sizing eld construction for robustly
generating a large spectrum of mesh types. Notice that the sizing
eld is relative; it describes the inhomogeneity of the desired edge
length. The actual edge length will be proportional to this relative
value, with the proportiondepending on the prescribed vertex bud-
get. (Alternatively the user may want to use as many vertices as
needed to produce a specic edge size.)
Because we aim at an isotropic approximation of the input domain
boundary, the sizing eld on the boundary should be a function of
the local absolute maximum curvature. Since we also aim at ap-
proximating the domain topology, we need to make sure that the
boundary approximation error will never exceed the local “thick-
ness” of the domain: for instance, a dumbbell shape should have
small tets in its bottleneck. Therefore we propose to build our sizing
eld on the notion of local feature size (lfs) introduced by Amenta
and Bern [1998] and widely used in the eld of shape reconstruc-
tion: it corresponds to the combination of curvature and thickness
as we require. To dene the local feature size, one rst introduces
===== page 5 =====
the medial axis Sk(
), of the domain (its intuitive skeleton) which
is the locus of all the centers of maximal balls included in either 
or its complement. Note that this skeleton has already been iden-
tied in the meshing community as playing a central role in siz-
ing [Quadros et al. 2004]. Then the local feature size lfs(x) at a
point x of 
 is dened as the distance d(x; Sk(
)) from x to the
medial axis (where d(:; :) is the Euclidean distance function).
Given the local feature size on the boundary, we need a canonical
and controllable way to extrapolate this function to the interior. We
face two conicting constraints: a desire to minimize the number
of total tets by forcing the inside of the object to have the largest
tets possible, and the need to bound the mesh gradation (i.e., how
fast tet sizes vary within a neighborhood) to maintain good shape
quality [Ruppert 1993]. We propose to recast the problem of nding
an ideal sizing eld to nding the maximal K-Lipschitz function
that does not exceed lfs(x) on 
. The parameter K will control
the gradation (0 being the uniform case) of the resulting eld. As
we prove in the Appendix A, the function:
(x) = inf
s2@
[K d(s; x) + lfs(s)] (9)
satises these requirements. Consequently, we used it in all the
examples shown in this paper. Now that the theoretical aspects of
our approach have been addressed, we describe in the next section
the details of a concrete implementation of these ideas.
3 Algorithm
In this section, we go through the details of each step of the follow-
ing pseudo-code which summarizes our approach:
Read the input boundary mesh @
Setup Data Structure & Preprocessing
Compute sizing eld 
Generate initial sites xi inside 
Do
Construct Delaunay triangulation(fxig)
Move sites xi to their optimal positions x?
i
Until (convergence or stopping criterion)
Extract interior mesh
For efciency as well as robustness, we opted to use the Compu-
tational Geometry Algorithms Library (CGAL [Fabri et al. 2000])
for the input mesh data structure, as well as for the 3D Delaunay
triangulation using robust arithmetics.
3.1 Input Domain Boundary
Our algorithm takes as input an intersection free closed surface tri-
angle mesh dening the domain boundary @
. We have no re-
striction on the topology of the domain 
: it may contain multiple
connected components, or have multiple voids, or both (see Fig. 6).
3.2 Setup & Preprocessing
The vertices of the input surface mesh @
 are inserted in a 3D De-
launay triangulation, to create what we call the control mesh. This
control mesh is used by our algorithm to estimate the local fea-
ture size of @
 as well as to answer inside/outside queries. For
efcient inside/outside queries, we require that the control mesh
contains all triangle facets of the input boundary @
, guarantee-
ing that it is the restricted Delaunay triangulation of the input
vertices [Cohen-Steiner et al. 2002]. This allows us to tag the
corresponding faces of the control mesh and in turn its tets with
inside/outside tags. To achieve these goals, @
 is originally ei-
ther enriched or remeshed using an isotropic surface meshing algo-
rithm [Boissonnat and Oudot 2005].
Discrete Skeleton Once the control mesh has been generated,
we extract its poles by selecting a subset of Voronoi vertices (i.e.,
circumcenters of tets) in the following manner. For each Delaunay
vertex v we rst select as a pole the farthest circumcenter from all
incident tets. The vector formed by v and this pole is considered as
the local normal estimate. We deduce a local tangent plane estimate
in v, and two half-spaces bounded by this plane. Next we search in
the half-space that does not contain the pole the farthest Voronoi
vertex incident to the site. If it exists it is added as a pole too. We
refer the reader to [Amenta and Bern 1998] for a more detailed de-
scription of this simple procedure. By denition, and assuming a
sufciently dense set of points sampled on the boundary, the result-
ing set of all these poles is a discrete approximation of the skeleton
(or medial axis) of the domain boundary @
 (see Fig. 7).
Figure 7: Poles: The set of all poles (depicted as red dots) represents a
discrete approximation of the skeleton of a 2D (left) or 3D (right) shape.
Local Feature Size At each vertex of the boundary @
, we
approximate its local feature size lfs by measuring the distance to
its closest pole (Fig. 8). To improve the efciency of these queries
(the set of poles is a dense point set for a complex boundary), we
create a static kD-tree search data structure from the poles.
Figure 8: Left: poles extracted from the Bunny model. Middle, right: the
distance from each input vertex to the set of poles is the approximated local
feature size, capturing both local thickness and curvature of the shape.
Boundary Supersampling The input boundary is initially
sampled with a large number of quadrature samples (used later
on to nd a good approximation of the surface). More precisely,
three sets of quadrature samples are generated: on the boundary it-
self, on its sharp creases, and on its corners (for piecewise smooth
domains—see, e.g., Fig. 16); this will allow us to both approximate
the boundary and t its features. Each quadrature sample stores its
position x as well as a quadrature value, incorporating the area ds
(for surface quadrature samples) or length dl (for feature quadrature
samples) it covers. These values are set to ds=(x)4 and dl=(x)3
respectively, to conform to our mass density eld [Du and Wang
2003]. Each corner sample is given an innite density to guarantee
that a vertex will be assigned there.
3.3 Fast Marching Construction of Sizing Field
Recall that a parameter K is used to adjust the sizing eld accord-
ing to the desired mesh gradation (see Section 2.3, and Figure 9
for illustration). We store the sizing eld on a uniform grid bound-
ing the domain. Each node of the grid must store the local sizing
eld value  and an additional bit to specify whether this grid node
lies inside or outside the domain as these grid nodes will be used
to efciently generate initial positions for the vertices of the mesh.
However, computing  in the interior of 
 would require the evalu-
ation of a minimum over each vertex of @
. To provide a faster grid
initialization we use a fast marching method on the uniform grid us-
ing the 6-neighborhood incidence relationship beginning with the
grid cells that intersect @
. We dene a candidate cell x as a cell
for which we have stored a temporary buddy cell, denoted hereafter
y(x). The latter is astride of the boundary, and has the property that
K d(x; y(x)) + lfs(y(x)) is the current known minimum value of
===== page 6 =====
the sizing eld (x). The candidate cells are maintained in a prior-
ity queue ordered by their current estimated value of . This queue
is initialized with all grid cells that are neighbors of a grid cell in-
tersecting @
. At each step of the marching process we pop the
candidate cell with minimum  value out of the queue, set its nal
sizing eld value to , and push other possible adjacent candidates
in the queue with the same buddy cell. This fast marching method
will thus propagate values of  from the initial boundary to the in-
side of the domain. Note that this could introduce an approximation
in the evaluation of the sizing eld, since the boundary cell c(x)
such that K d(x; c(x)) + lfs(c(x)) is globally minimal might not
be among the buddy cells of x's neighbors. We argue that the error
is negligible. The reason is that the set of points p that have a same
buddy cell y is star-shaped around y. Indeed, on the line segment
from p to y(p), the function (s) = K d(s; y(p)) + lfs(y(p))
decreases with speed K; as  is K-Lipschitz, we have that   ,
therefore  =  since  is the minimum over all y 2 @
, and
nally y(s) = y(p). Hence, the rst grid cell q met by the ray
p   y(p) is most likely such that y(q) = y(p). One then has
(q)  (p); thus, (q) must have been already computed by the
time p is taken care of. This simple procedure enables an efcient
and robust initialization of our sizing eld grid.
Figure 9: Sizing elds computed for three increasing values for K. The
smaller K, the smoother the grading. For large values, the ideal edge size
is rapidly increasing as one moves away from the boundary.
3.4 Initial Point Sampling
Given the potential complexity of the input boundary and the opti-
mized 3D Delaunay triangulation in terms of geometry and topol-
ogy (with possibly multiple connected components and holes), a
good initialization of the tet mesh vertices is desirable. We “spread”
the requested number of vertices throughout the domain while
roughly matching the desired local density through error diffusion
over the sizing eld. This initial sampling proceeds in two passes.
In order to calibrate the sampling so as to t the vertex budget spec-
ied by the user, the rst pass sums up the values dv=(x)3 for
each interior node of the sizing eld grid, where dv denotes the
volume of the node and x its position. The second pass iterates
over the same grid nodes in serpentine order, computing for each
node its corresponding (oating point) number of initial vertices to
lay down locally, quantizes this number to the nearest integer and
diffuses the corresponding residual to its neighbors: this process is
a straightforward extension of [Ostromoukhov 2001] to volumetric
images. Although these placements do not guarantee any quality on
the resulting Delaunay mesh, we achieve a local density of vertices
consistent with the sizing eld for a very low computational effort.
3.5 Energy Minimization
The energy minimization phase, alternating connectivity and ge-
ometry optimization, is the core of our algorithm. From the current
vertex positions, the energy is minimized by computing the 3D De-
launay triangulating of these sites. For a given connectivity, the
energy is further minimized by moving each interior vertex xi to
its optimal placement within its 1-ring (Eq. 8).
Boundary Vertices We must treat the current boundary vertices
differently to provide adequate boundary conditions to our mini-
mization, as well as a good isotropically-sampled approximation of
the domain boundary. A simple and practical solution is to use a
variant of the constrained centroidal Voronoi tessellation approach
(CCVT [Du et al. 2003]). First, in order to identify the current
boundary vertices, we examine each boundary quadrature sample
si, and locate its nearest vertex in the current mesh (through a fast
kD tree query), and accumulate at that vertex the quadrature value
at si times the coordinates of si. Subsequently, we focus on the ver-
tices with a non-zero quadrature sum, since those are the boundary
vertices that require a specic treatment. We move these bound-
ary vertices to the average value they each have accumulated dur-
ing the pass over all quadrature samples. This position provides
a good, low-cost approximation of the centroid of the intersection
between the 3D Voronoi cell of the boundary vertex and the input
boundary @
. We proceed similarly for the feature quadrature sam-
ples involved in the piecewise smooth case, where we must t sharp
creases too. As demonstrated in our results (see Fig. 10 for an illus-
tration of several steps of optimization on a simple boundary), this
simple procedure results in well-shaped triangles that t the domain
boundary, and whose size is in agreement with the sizing eld.
Figure 10: Optimization steps for 1000 vertices in a torus.100Kquadrature
samples were spread on the boundary, and the sizing eld is constant to get
a uniform mesh. Observe how the radius ratio distribution shifts towards1.
3.6 Accelerating Convergence
Although our quadratic energy minimization provides a powerful
tool to design high-quality meshes, the convergence rate can be
slow for large number of vertices. We have successfully experi-
mented with the following practical shortcuts to get faster results.
Delaunay Renement Direct minimization of more than
100; 000 vertices can be computationally expensive. Instead, we
prefer starting the energy minimization with a much smaller num-
ber of vertices. Before it even reaches a minimum, we increase the
number of vertices by adding a specied fraction (typically, 50%)
of the vertices at a subset of the Voronoi centers of the current mesh.
To select the latter subset, we sort all tets by decreasing size of cir-
cumradius divided by the local desired edge length (to know where
renement is most needed). After another round of minimization
steps, we repeat this procedure, until the requested number of ver-
tices is reached. The speed-up is considerable, while achieving the
same nal quality.
Selective Optimizations A straightforward improvement of
vertex position update optimizes only the vertices adjacent to bad
quality tets (say, with a radius ratio less than 0:3) and their imme-
diate neighbors. Although no theoretical guarantees back up this
===== page 7 =====
trick, it works remarkably well in practice. We recommend switch-
ing to such a selective optimization once the full-blown optimiza-
tion steps are relatively small in amplitude.
Boundary Vertex Jittering As expected from our energy, the
inside tets are well shaped after minimization. However, because of
the boundary constraints that we must satisfy, a few slivers can re-
main adjacent to boundary vertices. We have implemented a fast
”jittering” of these points; in order to snap a sliver, we slightly
move one of its adjacent boundary vertices in the local tangent
plane. Similar in spirit to the more general procedure of sliver
exudation [Cheng et al. 1999], but for the easier case of tets on
boundaries, this jittering sufces to remove the remaining slivers.
Vertex Teleportation or Insertion We also recommend spo-
radically removing the vertex with the smallest Voronoi cell w.r.t.
the desired edge length (i.e., in the densest region), and inserting it
at the centroid of the interior tet with the worst radius ratio. Such
tunnelling of vertices is particularly useful when tight control over
the worst element is required. If the vertex budget does not have to
be maintained, one can directly add vertices inside the worst tets.
Figure 11: Final Extraction: As the Delaunay triangulation covers the con-
vex hull, the last stage of our algorithm must extract the inside tets.
3.7 Final Mesh extraction
To produce the nal mesh, we need to peel off the Delaunay tets of
our mesh that are outside the domain (remember that a Delaunay
mesh triangulates the convex hull of the vertices—see Fig. 11). A
rst approach is to consider the Delaunay triangulation restricted to
the input domain, by tagging a tet as outside when its circumsphere
center is located outside 
. Similar in spirit to the Cocone algo-
rithm [Amenta et al. 200], we consider instead the Delaunay trian-
gulation restricted to a slightly thicker version of the input domain

. For each tet initially tagged outside, we compute the ratio be-
tween the distance d from the circumsphere center to the boundary
@
 and the circumradius; if this ratio is smaller than a predened
threshold (0:4 in all our experiments) we tag the tet inside.
4 Results and Discussions
The gures in this paper illustrate the robustness and versatility of
our technique: our implementation can handle large and/or complex
domains of arbitrary topology in a matter of minutes. Although a
visual inspection cannot provide a thorough assessment of our re-
sults, all the cutaway views as well as the radius ratio distributions
that we obtained exhibit high quality tet shapes throughout the do-
main. In contrast to many other methods we do not a priori assign
vertices to be either on the boundary or in the interior. It is the min-
imization procedure that will make them stick to boundary or not,
driven by the sizing eld and number of vertices required. This fea-
ture partially explains the quality of the results, since the mesh is not
constrained to a given budget of boundary vertices. Also, our expe-
rience shows that global optimization of the connectivity through a
Delaunay triangulation renders the results signicantly better: this
handling of the connectivity is possibly the sharpest departure from
common approaches that perform local updates only.
Results can be obtained in a matter of seconds or minutes. For in-
stance, Fig. 10 was obtained in 16 seconds (for the 50 iterations,
which include a Delaunay triangulation and the vertex position op-
timizations at each iteration) on a Pentium IV 3GHz. A more com-
plex model, such as the hand in Fig. 12 requires on average 2:1
Figure 12: Scanned hand: on this highly detailed mesh (36K vertices,
174K tets, with color-coded lfs), mesh gradation is a must: a uniform mesh
ne enough to capture the surface details would have millions of tets; In-
stead, our algorithm can reproduce all the ne surface features while using
large tets inside the domain. Sizing eld parameter: K = 1. As the radius
ratio distribution shows, there are no degenerate tets. Worst radius ratio
= 0:29, average radius ratio = 0:86, average dihedral angle = 70o. Mean
symmetric distance from input boundary: 0.024% of the bounding box.
seconds per iteration, including Delaunay triangulation, boundary
quadrature, and vertex updates for the 36K vertices. For good
meshes, 10 to 20 iterations are sufcient, but we often increase this
number to 50, and use the speed-ups described in Section 3.6 for
a nal high quality result. Although very few timings are available
for previous optimization methods, we consider the time involved
in our technique for mesh design practical. Notice that we can also
deal with sharp features, as Figure 16 demonstrates—a full treat-
ment treatment of such mechanical would however require a good
Constrained Delaunay mesher.
Figure 13 demonstrates the quality of approximation of the bound-
ary for the Bunny model, for increasing vertex budgets ranging
from 1K to 10K vertices. We plot the mean symmetric (L2) dis-
tance in percentage of the bounding box against the number of sites,
as well as a color-coded illustration of the approximation error.
Judging the quality of the results is, however, a difcult task. First,
many (often contradictory) quality measures have been proposed
over the years. Second, when averages of radius ratios are given,
they do not tell the whole story: many slivers can be present even
when the average is high. Finally, we could not nd or get tet
Figure 13: Mean symmetric approximation error against the number of sites
measured with Metro. The approximation error is expressed in percentage
of the bounding box. The four bunnies shown correspond respectively to 2,
4, 6 and 8K sites, with their approximation error in false colors.
===== page 8 =====
Figure 14: Gargoyle: a comparison with [Cutler et al. 2004] gives further
evidence of the quality of our results. Our distribution in terms of radius
ratios (one of the fairest measures [Shewchuk 2002a]) is far superior to a
standard optimization technique (mesh courtesy B. Cutler).
meshes of usual CG models (such as the bunny) or of canonical
shapes, aside from the results presented in [Cutler et al. 2004] (see
Fig. 14 for comparison). nevertheless, we provide typical numbers
of our results in Table 1 for comparative purposes. The distribution
curves given in most of our gures also indicate how well shaped
most of the tets are. We also indicate relevant numbers in each
caption for completeness.
Finally, in Fig. 15 we compare our optimization technique with the
unit-mesh approach [Frey and George 2000] used in commercial
meshers. This technique has been applied on a high-quality uniform
input boundary mesh of the bunny generated using the technique
presented in [Surazhsky et al. 2003], resulting in 275K tets and 49K
vertices in 12.5s (the number of vertices cannot be specied and
results from the conforming of the boundary). As this unit-mesh
approach splits long edges into smaller equal-length edges during
the meshing process, the nal mesh exhibits directional aliasing in
the form of lines of tets, potentially detrimental to the simulation
of isotropic phenomena. To provide a fair comparison, we used our
technique with a uniform sizing eld and the same number of nal
vertices. Our mesh was obtained in 4 min. Both distributions of
radius ratios show no slivers; however, our approach yields better
shaped tets overall, albeit at the price of a higher cost.
Limitations Our design choice to approximate the input bound-
ary instead of conforming to it can also be seen as a limitation
for certain applications. Additionally, we do not have theoretical
bounds on the quality measures of the resulting tets. However, our
results indicate that in practice, our minimization procedure gener-
ates well-shaped tets inside the domain, with better radius ratio dis-
tribution curves than any of the tet meshes we came across. Note
that this high quality, most desirable for simulation purposes, natu-
rally comes with higher computational cost than typical greedy (e.g.
Delaunay renement) methods.
5 Conclusions
We have introduced a novel approach to the construction of high-
quality, isotropic tetrahedral meshes. Based on a sound variational
Model #v #tets min/average L2
radius ratio error (%bb)
Torus 1K 4K 0.42 / 0.88 0.17
Bunny 49K 275K 0.37 / 0.89 0.04
Hand 36K 174K 0.29 / 0.86 0.024
Gargoyle 50K 260K 0.23 / 0.88 0.053
Fandisk 3K 14K 0.29 / 0.87 0.021
Table 1: Min/average radius ratios and mean approximation errors of the
input boundary obtained on a series of models. “Bunny” refers to Fig. 15
principle, our technique provides a robust mesh design tool that can
accommodate requirements on the nal number of vertices and on
the mesh gradation, for arbitrary domain complexity and topology.
We demonstrated the scalability of our approach by meshing large,
complex domains, even with sharp features. In future work, we
wish to explore how to extend our approach to anisotropic meshing
using not just a mass density, but a tensor eld. Other boundary
conditions for our optimization could also be studied.
Acknowledgments The authors wish to thank Peter Schr¨oder as one of the
instigators of this project. Many thanks to Alexandre Olivier-Mangon and George
Drettakis for providing us with the torso model. Our gratitude also goes to Joe
Warren, Sean Mauch, Peter Krysl, Fehmi Cirak and Tamer, Barbara Cutler, Steve
Oudot, Sylvain Pion, and Andreas Fabri for precious help along the way. Sponsors
include NSF (CARGO DMS-0221669 and DMS-0221666, CAREER CCR-0133983,
and ITR DMS-0453145), DOE (DE-FG02-04ER25657), the EU Network of Excel-
lence AIM@SHAPE (IST NoE No 506766), and Pixar.
References
AMENTA, N., AND BERN, M. 1998. Surface Reconstruction by Voronoi Filtering. In
Proc. of 14th Symp. on Computational Geometry (SCG'98), 39–48.
AMENTA, N., CHOI, S., DEY, T., AND LEEKHAU, N. 200. A Simple Algorithm
for Homeomorphic Surface Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the Symposium on
Computational geometry, 213–222.
BOISSONNAT, J.-D., AND OUDOT, S. 2005. Provably Good Sampling and Meshing
of Surfaces. Graphical Models (special issue on Solid Modeling). To appear.
BOROUCHAKI, H., GEORGE, P., HECHT, F., LAUG, P., AND SALTEL, E. 1997.
Delaunay mesh generation governed by metric specications. Part 1 : Algorithms.
Finite Elements in Analysis and Design 25, 61–83.
BOROUCHAKI, H., GEORGE, P., AND MOHAMMADI, B. 1997. Delaunay mesh
generation governed by metric specications. Part 2 : Application examples. Finite
Elements in Analysis and Design 25, 85–109.
CAREY, G. F. 1997. Computational Grids: Generation, Adaptation, and Solution
Strategies. Taylor & Francis eds.
CHEN, L., AND XU, J. 2004. ”Optimal Delaunay triangulations”. Journal of Compu-
tational Mathematics 22, 2, 299–308.
CHEN, L. 2004. Mesh smoothing schemes based on optimal Delaunay triangulations.
In Proceedings of 13th International Meshing Roundtable, 109–120.
CHENG, S. W., AND DEY, T. K. 2002. Quality meshing with weighted Delaunay
renement. In Proc. 13th ACM-SIAM Sympos. Discrete Algorithms, 137–146.
CHENG, S.-W., AND POON, S.-H. 2003. Graded conforming Delaunay tetrahedral-
ization with bounded radius-edge ratio. In Proc, of the 14th ACM-SIAM Sympo-
sium on Discrete algorithms (SODA), 295–304.
CHENG, S.-W., DEY, T. K., EDELSBRUNNER, H., FACELLO, M. A., AND TENG,
S.-H. 1999. Sliver Exudation. In Proc. 15th ACM Symp. Comput. Geom., 1–13.
CHENG, S.-W., DEY, T. K., RAMOS, E., AND RAY, T. 2004. Quality Meshing for
Polyhedra with Small Angles. In Proc. of ACM Symp. on Comp. Geom., 290–299.
COHEN-STEINER, D., DE VERDIERE, E. C., AND YVINEC, M. 2002. Conforming
Delaunay triangulations in 3D. In Proc. of Symp. on Comp. Geom., 237–246.
COHEN-STEINER, D., ALLIEZ, P., AND DESBRUN, M. 2004. Variational Shape
Approximation. ACM Trans. on Graphics (SIGGRAPH), 905–914.
CUTLER, B., DORSEY, J., AND MCMILLAN, L. 2004. Simplication and Improve-
ment of Tetrahedral Models for Simulation. In Proceedings of the 2004 Eurograph-
ics/ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on Geometry Processing, 95–104.
Figure 15: Comparison of our method (right, obtained in 4 minutes) with the
unit mesh approach [Frey and George 2000] (left, obtained in 12 seconds).
To make a fair comparison we provide as input a uniform mesh and specify a
uniform density for both methods. The distribution of radius ratios (middle)
demonstrates the quality of our resulting tetrahedra.
===== page 9 =====
DU, Q., AND WANG, D. 2003. Tetrahedral mesh generation and optimization based
on centroidal Voronoi tessellations. International Journal on Numerical Methods
in Engineering 56(9), 1355–1373.
DU, Q., GUNZBURGER, M., AND JU, L. 2003. Constrained Centroidal Voronoi
Tessellations for Surfaces. SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 24, 5, 1488–1506.
EPPSTEIN, D., 2001. Global optimization of mesh quality. Tutorial at the 10th Int.
Meshing Roundtable, Newport Beach.
FABRI, A., GIEZEMAN, G.-J., KETTNER, L., SCHIRRA, S., AND SCH ¨ONHERR, S.
2000. On the Design of CGAL, a Computational Geometry Algorithms Library.
Softw. – Pract. Exp. 30, 11, 1167–1202. www.cgal.org.
FREITAG, L., AND OLLIVIER-GOOCH, C. 1996. A comparison of Tetrahedral Mesh
Improvement Techniques. In Proc. of 6th Int. Meshing Roundtable, 87—1000.
FREY, J. L., AND GEORGE, P. L. 2000. Mesh Generation: Applications to Finite
Elements. Hermes, Paris.
HARDIN, D. P., AND SAFF, E. B. 2004. Discretizing Manifolds via Minimum Energy
Points. Notices of the AMS 51(10), 1186–1194.
HOPPE, H., DEROSE, T., DUCHAMP, T., MCDONALD, J., AND STUETZLE, W.
1993. ”Mesh Optimization”. ACM Trans. on Graphics (SIGGRAPH), 19–26.
KRYSL, P., AND ORTIZ, M. 2001. Variational Delaunay Approach to the Generation
of Finite Element Meshes. Int. J. for Num. Meth. in Eng. 50(7), 1681–1700.
LI, X.-Y., AND TENG, S.-H. 2001. Generate Sliver Free Three Dimensional Mesh.
In Proc. 12th ACM-SIAM Sympos. Discrete Algorithms.
LI, X.-Y., TENG, S.-H., AND UNGOR, A. 2000. ”Biting: Advancing Front Meets
Sphere Packing”. Int. J. on Num. Methods in Eng. 49, 1, 61–81.
LLOYD, S. P. 1957. Least Squares Quantization in PCM's. Tech. rep., Bell Telephone
Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ.
MITCHELL, S., AND VAVASIS, S. 2000. Quality Mesh Generation in Higher Dimen-
sions. SIAM J. Sci. Comput. 29, 1334–1370.
MOLINO, N., BRIDSON, R., TERAN, J., AND FEDKIW, R. 2003. A Crystalline,
Red Green Strategy for Meshing Highly Deformable Objects with Tetrahedra. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Meshing Roundtable, 103–114.
OSTROMOUKHOV, V. 2001. A simple and efcient error-diffusion algorithm. In
Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH, 567–572.
OWEN, S. J. 1998. A Survey of Unstructured Mesh Generation Technology. In
Proceedings of the 7th International Meshing Roundtable, 239–267.
QUADROS, W. R., SHIMADA, K., AND OWEN, S. J., 2004. 3D Discrete Skeleton
Generation by Wave Propagation on PR-Octree for Finite Element Mesh Sizing.
Poster, Solid Modeling Conference.
RUPPERT, J. 1993. A New and Simple Algorithm for Quality 2-Dimensional Mesh
Generation. In Proc. of the 4th ACM/SIAM Symp. on Disc. Algo. (SODA), 83–92.
SHEWCHUK, J. R. 1998. A Condition Guaranteeing the Existence of Higher-
Dimensional Constrained Delaunay Triangulations. In Proc. 14th Annu. ACM
Sympos. Comput. Geom., 76–85.
SHEWCHUK, J. R. 1998. Tetrahedral mesh generation by Delaunay renement. In
Proc. 14th Annu. ACM Sympos. Comput. Geom., 86–95.
SHEWCHUK, J. 2002. What Is a Good Linear Element? Interpolation, Conditioning,
and Quality Measure. In Proc. of 11th Int. Meshing Roundtable, 115–126.
SHEWCHUK, J. R. 2002. Delaunay Renement Algorithms for Triangular Mesh
Generation. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications 22, 21–74.
SURAZHSKY, V., ALLIEZ, P., AND GOTSMAN, C. 2003. Isotropic Remeshing of
Surfaces: a Local Parameterization Approach. In Proc. of 12th Int. Meshing
Roundtable.
TENG, S.-H., WONG, C. W., AND LEE, D. T. 2000. Unstructured Mesh Generation:
Theory, Practice, and Perspectives. International Journal Computational Geometry
and Applications 10, 3 (June), 227–266.
WARREN, J., SCHAEFER, S., HIRANI, A., AND DESBRUN, M., 2004. Barycentric
Coordinates for Convex Sets. Preprint.
A Lipschitz Sizing Field
We wish to prove that the sizing eld dened in Eq. (9) is both K-Lipschtiz and maxi-
mal. Because we want the function to be K-Lipschitz and agree with lfs on the bound-
ary, one can easily show the following property:
(x)  inf
s2@
[K d(x; s) + lfs(s)] :
We now need to show that the rhs is K-lipschitz and coincides with the lfs on the
boundary: if so, the rhs will be the maximal sizing eld we seek.
For x 2 
, let
y(x) = argmins2@
 [K d(x; s) + lfs(s)] :
If x0 is in 
, we have by denition:
(x0)  K d(x0; y(x)) + lfs(y(x))
 K d(x0; x) + K d(x; y(x)) + lfs(y(x))
 K d(x0; x) + (x)
Figure 16: Mechanical parts: Even in the presence of sharp features, our tet
meshing algorithm exhibits excellent behavior for low or high vertex count
while capturing features and corners remarkably well. We tagged edges as
sharp features if their dihedral angles are more than 20o—more sophisti-
cated segmentation techniques could of course be used. (Top, middle) Joint
model (1:2K vertices); (Bottom) Fan disk model (3K vertices, mean/max
symmetric distance from input boundary: 0.021%/0.5% of the bounding
box), along with its radius ratio distribution. Notice the good aspect ratio
of both tets (see cutaway views) and surface triangles. A constant sizing
eld has been used for both models to obtain uniform tet meshes.
which shows that  is K-Lipschitz. Since lfs is 1-Lipschitz,
we cannot hope that  coincides with lfs on @
 unless K is at
least 1. If so, then for x 2 @
 we have
K d(x; y) + lfs(y)  lfs(x)
for all y 2 @
, with equality when y = x. Thus,  does
coincide with lfs on @
. Note that when K =1, (x) boils down to the length of the
shortest path from x to the medial axis of @
 while passing by a point on @
. When
K is less than 1, we get that (x) can be less than lfs(x) on the boundary due to the
Lipschitz constraint; however, the gradation is respected and the boundary sampling
will be better than what is necessary: it is therefore still a good choice of sizing eld.
B Transforming the Energy EODT
Let us start with the denition:
EODT = jjf   f primal
PWL jjL1 =
X
j
Z
Tj
jf   f primal
PWL j: (10)
In the tet Tj with vertices xi i = 1 : : : 4, the error function can be expressed as a
function of the barycentric coordinates i(x):
jf(x)   f primal
PWL (x)j =
X
i
i(x)x2
i   x2 =
X
i
i(x) (xi   x)2 : (11)
Notice that Eq. (
3) is easily derived from this last expression by plugging it into
Eq. (10). Rewriting xi   x as ((xi   cj) + (cj   x)), where cj is the circumcen-
ter of Tj, and plugging it into Eq. (10), we get the following conrmation of Eq. (7):
EODT =
X
j
Z
Tj

R2
j  jjx cj jj2

dx=
X
j

jTj jR2
j  
Z
Tj
jjx cj jj2dx

:
C Updates as Weighted Circumcenters
Notice that the energy EODT inside a tet T is always extremal at the circumcenter
cT . As a consequence, the optimal position of a vertex that has only four neighbors
is exactly at cT . Using Eq. (5) in this special case of a 1-ring in the shape of a tet
T = (xp; xq; xr; xs), and taking the point xi to be located on xp, we get:
cT = xp   1
2 j
ij( rxp jT j)
hP
xk 2T jjxp   xkjj2
i
+ F(xp; xq; xr)
+ F(xp; xq; xs) + F(xp; xr; xs) )
where the extra terms on the rhs only depend on each face of the tet. Applying this
formula to an arbitrary 1-ring centered on xp, the face terms cancel each other if
we sum the contributions from all the tets, simplifying the expression drastically, and
resulting in Eq. (6).