
===== page 1 =====
This paper introduces a volumetric harmonic map method. First we map the volumetric boundary conformally onto a sphere. Then with this boundary condition, 
we compute its harmonic map in the object interior with a heat flow method. Our work is general enough to be easily generalized  to higher dimensional cases,or to 
other organ systems than brain, e.g. for representing cardiac motion. We suggest that 3D harmonic mapping of volume can provide a canonical coordinate system 
for feature identification and registration for medical imaging.
References: [1] Gu X. Wang Y., Chan T.F., Thompson P.M., and Yau S.-T., Genus zero surface conformal mapping and its application to brain surface mapping, 
Information Processing in Medical Imaging, pages 172-184, Ambleside, UK, July 2003
Volumetric Harmonic Brain Mapping Using a Variational 
Method
Volumetric Harmonic Brain Mapping Using a Volumetric Harmonic Brain Mapping Using a Volumetric Harmonic Brain Mapping Using a Variational Variational Variational 
MethodMethodMethod
Yalin Wang1, Xianfeng Gu2, Tony F. chan1, Paul M. Thompson3, Shing-Tung Yau4
1Mathematics Department, UCLA
2Computer Science, State University of New York, Stony Brook 
3Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Brain Mapping Division, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine
4Mathematics Department, Harvard University
INTRODUCTION
Brain surface conformal mapping research has been successful.  We extended our algorithm [1] to find a 3D volumetric harmonic m ap from a 3D brain volumetric model to a 
solid sphere.  We use mesh structure to represent both surface and volumetric data.  We proposed a new algorithm, sphere carvin g algorithm, which can build 3D tetrahedral 
mesh from a set of images with topology preservation.  Experimental results on both synthetic data and real data are reported.
METHODS
CONCLUSION
For more information, please contact: Yalin Wang,  ylwang@math.ucla.edu
We extend our cortical surface 
conformal mapping work to 
volumetric 3D volumetric harmonic 
map from a 3D brain volumetric 
model to a solid sphere.
RESULTS
Harmonic Map
O The map minimizes the stretching energy
O Geodesics are harmonic maps from a circle to 
the surface
O In general, harmonic maps may not exist, or 
unique
O Depends on the Riemannian metrics.  
Independent of the embeddings
O For 3-manifold, the existence of harmonic 
maps, the uniqueness of harmonic maps, the
diffeomorphic properties of harmonic maps are 
extremely difficult theoretic problems
O Between convex 3-disk, harmonic map exists 
and is most likely diffeomorphism
Sphere Carving Algorithm
O Input (a sequence of volume images and a desired surface 
genus number)
O Output (a tetrahedral mesh whose surface has the desired 
genus number)
Build a solid handle body tetrahedral mesh consisted of
tetrahedra, such that the sphere totally enclose the 3D data.  Let 
the boundary of the solid sphere be S.  We cut the model until we 
get the object 3D tetrahedral model.
Volumetric Harmonic Map Algorithm 
Details
O Harmonic energy
O Minimize Harmonic Energy
∑
∈
->==<
Kvu
vfufvukfffE
},{
2||)()(||),(,)(
∑
=
=
n
i
iilvuk
1
)cot(12
1),( θ
Volumetric Harmonic Map Method
O Initialization: We conformally map the volume surface 
to a sphere surface.  The internal parts are mapped to 
the sphere center.
O Energy Minimization: steepest descent method with a 
fixed boundary condition.
Volumetric Harmonic Map on 
Synthetic Data
Volumetric Parameterization
Sphere Carving Algorithm 
on Brain Model
Sphere Carving Algorithm 
on Prostate Model
Volumetric Brain Harmonic Map
More Volumetric Harmonic Map Examples 
