  
===== page 1 =====  
Robust Surface Remeshing Based on Conformal Welding  
Wei Chen∗ Siquan Sun† Yue Wang† Na Lei‡ Chander Sadasivan†  
Apostolos Tassiopoulos† Shikui Chen† Hang Si§ Xianfeng Gu†  
Abstract  
This work proposes a novel algorithm to eliminate the self-  
overlapping based on conformal welding theory, to improve  
the robustness of the surface remeshing algorithm. The  
proposed algorithm constructs a planar annulus with a high-  
quality triangulation, then weld the input surface with the  
annulus along their corresponding boundary components.  
The welded surface has a well-defined Riemannian metric  
and can be conformally mapped onto a convex planar  
domain by using the dynamic discrete surface Ricci flow  
method. This method guarantees the conformal mapping  
restricted on the input surface is a global embedding, and  
resolves the problem of self-intersections in the neighborhood  
of the boundary. The conformal welding method has been  
tested to remesh real car models. The experimental results  
demonstrate the method is highly effective in practice and  
greatly improves the robustness of the remeshing algorithm  
based on conformal uniformization.  
1 Introduction  
Surface mesh generation plays a fundamental role in  
CAD/CAE fields. Planar mesh generation methods  
are relatively mature, such as the Delaunay refinement  
method [2], and the centroidal Voronoi diagram method  
[6]. Surface meshing is much more challenging.  
Recently, Si et. al. [15] introduced a novel algo-  
rithm for generating high quality triangulations on sur-  
faces with complicated topologies based on conformal  
uniformization. The original CAD model is converted  
to a low-quality triangle mesh, obtained by triangula-  
tion on the parameter domain and refined by necessary  
preprocessing steps, such that the mesh is a water-tight  
manifold. The key idea is to flatten the input trian-  
gle mesh onto a planar domain by an angle-preserving  
(conformal) map, then a high quality planar mesh is  
generated and pulled back to the 3D surface. Since  
the mapping is angle-preserving, the Delaunay property  
is preserved in the surface triangulation. Furthermore,  
the planar sampling density is adaptive to the surface  
area element and the curvature, this ensures the surface  
meshing quality. Fig. 1 shows one example of remeshing  
a car chassis model based on conformal uniformization:  
∗Capital Normal University.  
†Stony Brook University.  
‡Corresponding author, nalei@dlut.edu.cn, Dalian University  
of Technology.  
§Cadence Design Systems Inc.  
frame (a) shows the 3D car chassis model; frame (b)  
illustrates the surface is flattened by a conformal map-  
ping; frame (c) demonstrates the conformality of the  
mapping by checkerboard texture mapping, all the right  
corner angles of the checkers are well preserved; the pla-  
nar image is triangulated using Delaunay refinement al-  
gorithm, the pull back triangulation on the surface has  
high qualities as shown in frame (d).  
In most scenarios, the quality of the input triangle  
mesh is often low, posing a significant risk to the sta-  
bility and convergence of standard conformal mapping  
algorithms. We choose the dynamic surface Ricci flow  
method [11, 10] to compute the parameterization be-  
cause it has a theoretic guarantee to produce the unique  
Riemannian metric, conformal to the initial metric and  
inducing the prescribed curvature. Furthermore, dy-  
namic surface Ricci flow is capable of handling low-  
quality input meshes and automatically improves the  
triangulation to remain Delaunay with final Rieman-  
nian metric.  
However, the parameterization result depends on  
the input geometry and the target curvature, it is pos-  
sible that the final mapping is only a local embed-  
ding, namely the mapping restricted to the neighbor-  
hood of each vertex is injective and surjective, but  
globally the image of the whole input mesh may have  
self-intersections. Especially, if the surface has con-  
cave boundaries, the image of the neighborhood of the  
boundary may have overlaps. This causes great diffi-  
culties for the downstream planar Delaunay refinement  
algorithm. As shown in Fig. 2, frame (a) shows a shield  
of a car tire model, frame (b) illustrates the conformal  
parameterization result, and the self-intersections can  
be found in the neighborhood of the boundary.  
To tackle this challenge, this work proposes a novel  
algorithm to improve the robustness of surface remesh-  
ing based on conformal welding technnique [9, 17]. Sup-  
pose the input surface M is a topological poly-annulus,  
namely a genus zero surface with multiple boundary  
components {γ1, . . . , γk}, We can seamlessly merge M  
with a topological annulus A having boundaries τ1  
and τ2, aligning them correspondingly with γ1 and τ1,  
φ : γ1 → τ1. The merged surface S ← M ∪φ A is a topo-  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 2 =====  
(a) 3D chassis model (b) conformal flattening (c) texture mapping (d) remeshing result  
Figure 1: Remeshing a whole car chassis model based on conformal uniformization.  
logical poly-annulus having boundaries τ2, γ2, . . . , γn.  
We treat τ2 as the exterior boundary component, and  
γ2, . . . , γn as the interior boundary components, and use  
the dynamic Ricci flow to map S onto a planar domain,  
such that the image of the exterior boundary τ2 is con-  
vex (or nearly convex), so the mapping is an embedding,  
the input surface M is conformally flattened without  
any self-intersection. This conformal welding technique  
can greatly improve the robustness of the algorithm. As  
shown in Fig. 2, the input surface is welded with a topo-  
logical annulus and the welded surface is conformally  
flattened in frame (c), the mapping restricted to the  
input surface has no overlap. Frame (d) shows confor-  
mality of the parameterization by checkerboard texture  
mapping.  
1.1 Contribution This work proposes a novel algo-  
rithm to improve the robustness of surface remeshing  
based on conformal welding method. Suppose the in-  
put surface is a poly-annulus, we construct a topological  
cylinder with high quality triangulation and weld the in-  
put surface with the annulus along one boundary loop.  
By using dynamic discrete surface Ricci flow, the welded  
surface is conformally flattened onto a near convex do-  
main on the plane. This method guarantees the confor-  
mal mapping restricted to the input surface is an em-  
bedding, and resolves the problem of self-intersections  
in the neighborhood of the boundary. In our experi-  
ments, we use the conformal welding method to remesh  
real car models, which shows the method is rigorous  
and practical, and significantly improves the robustness  
of the remeshing algorithm.  
2 Previous W ork  
The objective of surface triangle mesh generation is to  
tessellate a given 3D surface into triangles, creating  
a discrete representation suitable for various applica-  
tions, such as finite element analysis. Over the years,  
researchers have developed numerous algorithms and  
methods to address this challenge efficiently and accu-  
rately. This literature review highlights some prominent  
contributions in the field.  
Delaunay-Based Approaches Delaunay triangu-  
lation is a widely used technique for surface mesh  
generation [2]. Shewchuk's Triangle [22] is a popular  
tool for computing Delaunay triangulations of planar  
straight-line graphs and is often used as a building  
block in surface meshing algorithms. In 3D, adaptive  
refinement techniques, such as Bowyer-Watson and  
incremental insertion [3], are employed to generate  
high-quality triangle meshes from point clouds or  
surfaces. Centroidal voronoi tessellation is also a pop-  
ular method for high quality planar mesh generation [6].  
Constrained Delaunay T riangulation Handling  
constraints, such as sharp edges and features, is crucial  
in surface meshing. Recent developments include the  
CGAL library, which provides efficient algorithms for  
constrained Delaunay triangulation and mesh genera-  
tion [20]. These advancements enable the preservation  
of geometric features in the generated meshes.  
Surface Reconstruction Methods Surface recon-  
struction aims to recover a continuous surface from  
point clouds or scattered data. Poisson surface recon-  
struction [16] is a notable technique that combines  
surface reconstruction and mesh generation. It lever-  
ages the Poisson equation to create a smooth surface  
representation and subsequently generates triangle  
meshes.  
V ariational Approaches Variational methods, such  
as surface fairing and optimization-based meshing,  
have gained attention. Garland and Heckbert's surface  
simplification algorithm [8] is a classic example. It  
iteratively collapses edges to create simplified triangle  
meshes while preserving important geometric charac-  
teristics.  
Multi-resolution T echniques Multi-resolution  
representations are valuable for adaptive meshing.  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 3 =====  
(a). wheel housing model (b). conformal flattening (c). conformal flattening (d). conformal texture mapping  
with self intersections of the welded model  
Figure 2: Robust conformal parameterization of a shield of the car tire model. The conformal welding method  
eliminates the self-intersections.  
The work of Alliez et al. on Progressive Meshes [1]  
introduced a framework for constructing levels of detail  
in triangle meshes. This concept has applications in  
real-time graphics and efficient transmission of 3D  
models.  
Conformal Uniformization Based Method Re-  
cently, Si et. al. [15] introduced a novel algorithm for  
generating high quality triangulations on surfaces with  
complicated topologies based on conformal uniformiza-  
tion. The key idea is to flatten the input surface onto a  
planar domain by an angle-preserving (conformal) map,  
then a high quality planar mesh is generated and pulled  
back to the 3D surface. Since the mapping is angle-  
preserving, the Delaunay property is preserved to the  
surface triangulation. Furthermore, the planar sam-  
pling density is adaptive to the surface area element  
and the curvature, this guarantees the surface meshing  
quality.  
However, for surfaces with complicated topologies,  
conformal parameterization algorithms can only guar-  
antee the mapping is locally embedding, and globally  
immersion. Namely, they may produce self-intersections  
for concave boundary images. This will cause intrinsic  
difficulty for the planar Delaunay refinement algorithm  
since it always assumes the input has no self overlap-  
ping. The current work proposes to use the conformal  
welding method to glue the input surface with a topo-  
logical annulus and map the glued surface onto a planar  
domain with convex boundary condition so that the re-  
striction of the mapping on the initial surface is injec-  
tive. This will greatly improve the robustness of the  
remeshing algorithm.  
3 Theoretic F oundation  
This section briefly introduces the theoretic background  
for surface conformal geometry and surface Ricci flow.  
For more details, we refer readers to [12, 13, 11, 10] for  
more thorough treatments.  
3.1 Riemann Surface  
Definition 3.0.1. (Holomorphic Function) A  
complex function f : C → C, f (x + iy) = u + iv,  
satisfies the following Cauchy-Riemann equation  
∂u  
∂x = ∂v  
∂y , ∂u  
∂y = - ∂v  
∂x ,  
then f is called a holomorphic function. If the inverse  
function f -1 exists and is also holomorphic, then f is  
called a bi-holomorphic function.  
Given a topological surface S with an atlas A =  
{(Uα, φα)}, where Uα is an open set, φα : Uα → C  
is a homeomorphism, ( Uα, φα) is a local chart . if  
Uα ∩ Uβ ̸= ∅, then the transition map is defined as  
φαβ : φα(Uα ∩ Uβ) → φβ(Uα ∩ Uβ), φαβ = φβ ◦ φα.  
If all the transition maps are bi-holomorphic, then A is  
called a conformal structure.  
Definition 3.0.2. (Riemann Surface) A topolog-  
ical surface with a conformal structure is called a  
Riemann surface.  
Definition 3.0.3. (Isothermal parameter)  
Suppose (S, g) is an oriented metric surface, and U is  
a neighborhood U ⊂ S with the local coordinates (u, v)),  
such that the Riemannian metric has a special form  
g(u, v) = e2λ(u,v)(du2 + dv2),  
then (u, v) are called the isothermal parameter on U  
and λ : U → R is called the conformal factor function.  
According to classicial surface differential geometry, for  
any point p ∈ S, one can always find an neighborhood  
of p, Up, such that on Up, one can define isothermal  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 4 =====  
coordinates φp : Up → C. The union of isothermal co-  
ordinate charts {(Up, φp)} form a conformal structure,  
hence S is a Riemann surface.  
Under the isothermal parameter, the Gaussian cur-  
vature of the surface can be computed as  
K(x, y) = -∆gλ(x, y) = - 1  
e2λ(x,y) ∆λ(x, y).  
The total Gaussian curvature is a topological invariant.  
Theorem 3.1. (Gauss-Bonnet) Suppose (S, g) is  
surface with a Riemannia metric, then  
Z  
S  
KdA +  
Z  
∂S  
kgds = 2πχ(S),  
where χ(S) is the Euler characteristic number of S.  
3.2 Smooth Surface Ricci Flow  
Definition 3.1.1. (Pull Back Metric) Suppose  
(S, g) and (T, h) are two surfaces with Riemannian  
metrics, the local parameters of them are (x, y) and  
(u, v) respectively. The local representation of the  
metric tensor h is  
h(u, v) =  
 h11 h12  
h21 h22  
   
(u, v)  
A C 1 mapping φ : S → T has a local representation,  
(x, y) 7→ (u(x, y), v(x, y)).  
The pull back metric on S induced by φ is defined as  
φ∗h(x, y) = DφT hDφ,  
where Dφ is the Jacobi matrix of the mapping φ. φ∗h  
has the local representation  
φ∗h =  
 ux uy  
vx vy  
 T  h11 h12  
h21 h22  
   ux uy  
vx vy  
   
.  
Definition 3.1.2. (Conformal Mapping) Suppose  
(S, g) and (T, h) are surfaces with Riemannian metrics.  
A C 1 mapping φ : S → T is conformal, if  
(3.1) φ∗h = e2λg,  
where λ is the conformal factor function, λ : S → R.  
A conformal mapping between two surfaces preserves  
local shapes and angles.  
Suppose we conformally deform the surface Rie-  
mannian metric, g → ¯ g= e2λg, then the Gaussian  
curvature changes according to the Yamabe equation,  
¯K = 1  
e2λ (K - ∆gλ) .  
If we set ¯K to be constant, then we obtain the famous  
Koebe-Poincar´ e uniformization theorem.  
Theorem 3.2. (Koebe-Poincar ´e Uniformization)  
Suppose (S, g) is an orientable closed surface, then  
there is a scalar function λ : S → R, such that ¯ g= e2λg  
induces constant Gaussian curvature ¯K, where ¯K  
equals one of {+1, 0, -1} according to χ(S) > 0,  
χ(S) = 0 and χ(S) < 0.  
The constant curvature metric is called the uniformiza-  
tion metric of the surface. Yamabe equation can be  
solved using Hamilton's Ricci flow, which has been used  
for the proof of Poincar´ e's conjecture [18, 19].  
Definition 3.2.1. (Hamilton's Ricci Flow)  
Suppose (S, g) is a closed orientable metric surface, the  
normalized Ricci flow is defined as  
∂tg(p, t) = 2  
  2πχ(S)  
A(0) - K(p, t)  
   
g(p, t).  
Hamilton [14] and Chow [5] proved the convergence of  
surface Ricci flow.  
3.3 Discrete Surface Ricci Flow Smooth surface  
Ricci flow theory can be generalized to the discrete  
polyhedral surfaces. A smooth surfaces is approximated  
by a polyhedral surface S with vertex set V . We call  
(S, V) a marked surface. Given a marked surface, we can  
define different triangulations. A discrete Riemannian  
metric for a marked surface ( S, V) with a triangulation  
T can be represented as edge lengths d : E → R+,  
satisfying the triangle inequality, namely on each face  
[vi, vj, vk],  
d(vi, vj) + d(vj, vk) > d(vi, vk).  
The discrete Riemannian metric determines the corner  
angles, by the cosine law  
(3.2) cos θjk  
i = d2(vi, vj) + d2(vk, vi) - d2(vj, vk)  
2d(vi, vj)d(vk, vi) .  
where θjk  
i is the corner angle at vi in the face [vi, vj, vk].  
Fix a discrete Riemannian metric, there are many  
triangulations, among them, the Delaunay triangulation  
is highly preferred.  
Definition 3.2.2. (Delaunay Triangulation)  
Given a closed marked surface (S, V) with a discrete  
Riemannian metric d, a triangulation T is called  
Delaunay, if for any edge [vi, vj] shared by two faces  
[vi, vj, vk] and [vj, vi, vl], the condition  
(3.3) θij  
k + θji  
l ≤ π  
always holds.  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 5 =====  
Definition 3.2.3. (Edge Flip Operator) Given a  
closed marked surface (S, V) with a discrete Rieman-  
nian metric d and a triangulation T , an edge [vi, vj]  
shared by two faces [vi, vj, vk] and [vj, vi, vl]. The  
edge flip operator swaps the edge [vi, vj] to [vk, vl], and  
changes the triangles to [vi, vl, vk] and [vj, vk, vl].  
It is well known that we can modify a triangulation to  
be Delaunay by a sequence edge flip operators, such that  
a diagonal, for which the sum of its opposite angles is  
greater than π, is replaced by another diagonal.  
The discrete Gaussian curvature is defined as the  
angle deficit,  
(3.4) K(vi) =  
(  
2π - P  
jk θjk  
i vi ̸∈ ∂M  
π - P  
jk θjk  
i vi ∈ ∂M  
The total discrete Gaussian curvature also satisfies the  
Gauss-Bonnet theorem,  
X  
vi∈∂M  
K(vi) +  
X  
vi̸∈∂M  
K(vi) = 2πχ(M ).  
The conformal deformation is defined analogously  
Definition 3.2.4. (Vertex Scaling) Suppose M =  
(V, E, F) is a triangulated polyhedral surface, with a  
discrete metric d : E → R+. λ : V → R is the discrete  
conformal factor function defined on the vertex set V ,  
the vertex scaling operator is defined as follows:  
(3.5) d(vi, vj) 7→ eui d(vi, vj)euj , ∀ [vi, vj] ∈ E.  
The discrete conformal equivalence can be defined as  
follows: suppose d and d′ are two polyhedral metrics of  
the marked surface ( S, V), if there exists a sequence of  
triangulations Ti's and discrete metrics di's,  
T1, T2, . . . , Tn, d = d1, d2, . . . , dn = d′,  
such that  
1. Ti is Delaunay with respect to di;  
2. if Ti ̸= Ti+1 then they differ by an edge flip and  
di = di+1;  
3. if di ̸= di+1 then they differ by a vertex scaling and  
Ti = Ti+1.  
Definition 3.2.5. (Discrete Conformal) Two  
triangulated polyhedral metrics d and d′ on a closed  
marked surface (S, V) are discrete conformal, if they  
are related by a sequence of two types of moves: vertex  
scaling and edge flip preserving Delaunay property.  
The discrete surface Ricci flow is defined similar to the  
smooth one.  
Definition 3.2.6. (Discrete Surface Ricci Flow)  
Given a marked surface (S, V) with a polyhedral metric  
d and a triangulation T , suppose the target Gaussian  
curvature ¯K : T → R is given, then the Ricci flow is  
defined as  
dλ(vi, t)  
dt = ¯K(vi) - K(vi, t),  
during the flow, the triangulation is updated to preserve  
the Delaunay property.  
The discrete surface Ricci flow is the gradient flow of  
the following convex Ricci energy:  
(3.6) E(λ) :=  
Z λ nX  
i=1  
( ¯K(vi) - K(vi))dλi.  
The Hessian matrix of the Ricci energy can be rep-  
resented by the cotangent edge weight, for each edge  
[vi, vj],  
(3.7) wij = cot θij  
k + cotji  
l ,  
and the Hessain matrix is H = (hij)  
(3.8) hij =  
  P  
k̸=i wik i = j  
-wij i ̸= j  
The existence and the uniqueness of the solution to  
the discrete surface Ricci flow is shown in the following  
theorem, the detail of the proof is in [11].  
Theorem 3.3. (Discrete Surface Flow [11])  
Given a polyhedral metric d on a closed marked surface  
(S, V), and target curvature ¯K : V → (-∞, 2π),  
such that ¯K satisfies the Gauss-Bonnet conditionP K(v) = 2 πχ(S), there is a ¯d discrete conformal to  
d, and ¯d realized the curvature ¯k. ¯d is unique update to  
a scaling, and can be obtained by the discrete surface  
Ricci flow.  
3.4 Conformal W elding Suppose ( S1, g1) and  
(S2, g2) are two oriented compact surfaces with Rie-  
mannian metrics. Suppose γ1 ⊂ ∂S1 is a connected  
component on the boundary of S1, γ2 ⊂ ∂S2 a con-  
nected component on the boundary of S2. Without loss  
of generality, we can assume the total lengths of γ1 and  
γ2 are equal, otherwise we can perform a scaling. Fur-  
thermore, γ1 and γ2 are smooth curves. Let φ : γ1 → γ2  
is an isometric map between the two loops. We weld  
the two surfaces using φ as follows: each point p ∈ γ1 is  
equivalent to its image φ(p) ∈ γ2, the glued surface is  
S := S1  
[  
p∼φ(p)  
S2.  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 6 =====  
Let U1(p) be a neighborhood of p, φ1 : U1(p) → D2  
be a local conformal chart mapping U1(p) to the upper  
half disk of D2; U2(p) be a neighborhood of φ(p),  
φ2 : U2(p) → D2 be a local conformal chart mapping  
U2(p) to the lower half disk of D2. φ maps γ1|U1 to  
γ2|U2 . By Schwartz reflection principle, φ1 and φ2 can  
be glued to a conformal map from  
φ1 ∪ φ2 : U1(p) ∪ U2(φ(p)) → D2.  
This means S is a Riemann surface with well defined  
conformal structure.  
4 Computational Algorithms  
4.1 Overview The algorithmic pipeline is illustrated  
in Fig. 3. For a complex surface, the initial step involves  
segmenting it into several parts, each constituting a  
topological disk with or without holes. In the second  
step, for every part, each hole is filled by simply adding  
a vertex at the midpoint of the hole and connecting it  
to the edges along the boundary; thereafter, conformal  
welding is performed. The third step employs the  
discrete surface Ricci flow algorithm to compute the  
parameterization of the welded surface, with subsequent  
recovery of all boundaries. In the fourth step, planar  
Delaunay refinement is applied to the parameterization  
domain of the surface. Finally, in the last step, the  
remeshing result on the planar domain is pulled back  
onto the surface to obtain the final result.  
Figure 3: Pipeline of the algorithm.  
4.2 Surface Segmentation Suppose the input sur-  
face is a genus g closed surface, we need to either manu-  
ally or automatically decompose it into genus zero sur-  
face with multiple boundaries. This can be achieved  
using persistent homology method [7] to compute the  
handle loops and tunnel loops, and cut the surface along  
these loops. Another method is pants decomposition.  
Given a triangle mesh M , we compute its Poincar´ e  
dual mesh ¯M , each vertex v, edge e and face f on M is  
dual to a face ¯v, edge ¯e and vertex ¯f on ¯M . We treat  
¯M as a graph of vertices and compute a spanning tree  
¯T , then the cut graph Γ is defined as  
Γ := {e ∈ |¯e ̸∈ ¯T }.  
We slice M along Γ to obtain ¯M , for each vertex  
v ∈ Γ, there are v+, v- ∈ ∂ ¯M , the shortest path ¯ γ  
Algorithm 1 Shortest homotopically non-trivial loop  
Require: A connected triangle mesh M ;  
Ensure: The shortest loop γ that is homotopically non-  
trivial;  
Compute the cut graph Γ of M ;  
Prune valence one edges from Γ;  
Slice M along γ to obtain sliced mesh ¯M ;  
γ∗ ← ∅, L∗ ← ∞;  
for each v ∈ Γ do  
Find the corresponding vertices v+, v- ∈ ∂ ¯M ;  
Compute the shortest path γ from v+ to v-;  
if L∗ > length(γ) then  
γ∗ ← γ, L∗ ← length(γ);  
end if  
end for  
on ¯M corresponds to a loop γ on M . Furthermore, γ  
transversely intersects Γ, therefore γ is non-trivial in the  
homotopy group of the original mesh π1(M, p). We slice  
the surface along γ to reduce the topological complexity.  
By repeating this procedure, we eventually decompose  
the surface input 3 g - 3 pairs of pants. Each pair of  
pants is a genus zero surface. The algorithmic details  
can be found in Alg. 1 and 2.  
Algorithm 2 Pants Decomposition  
Require: A closed triangle mesh M with genus g;  
Ensure: Decompose M into 3g - 3 pairs of pants;  
updated ← true;  
while updated do  
updated ← false;  
for each connected component Mi of M do  
Compute the shortest loop γi of Mi using Alg. 1;  
if γi is not empty then  
Slice Mi along γi;  
updated ← true  
end if  
end for  
end while  
In the following steps, we remesh each surface  
patch with boundary constraints and eventually glue  
the remeshed patches together with consistent boundary  
conditions.  
4.3 Conformal W elding Suppose M1 is a triangle  
mesh with boundary components, suppose γ1 ∈ ∂M1.  
We trace γ1 to collect an ordered sequence of oriented  
edges denoted as {e1  
1, e1  
2, . . . , e1  
n}. After scaling, we can  
assume the total length of γ1 is 2π. We construct a pla-  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 7 =====  
nar annulus M2, with exterior boundary γ2 represented  
as an ordered sequence of oriented edges{e1  
2, e2  
2, . . . , e2  
n},  
such that the length of e1  
k equals to the length of e2  
k.  
The inner boundary loop is on a smaller circle centered  
at the origin with radius δ, 0 < δ < 1. We use De-  
launay refinement algorithm to generate a high quality  
triangulation of the interior of the annulus to obtain the  
triangle mesh M2. We glue M1 with M2, such that e1  
k  
is glued with e2  
k isometrically, the union is denoted as  
M . Please note that the vertex positions of M is not  
well defined. Suppose v1  
k ∈ γ1 corresponding to v2  
k ∈ γ2,  
they have different coordinates in M1 and M2 respec-  
tively. However, the edge lengths on M are well defined.  
The discrete surface Ricci flow only requires the edge  
lengths, hence M is appropriate for our purpose. The  
algorithmic details can be found in Alg. 3.  
Algorithm 3 Conformal Welding  
Require: A triangle mesh M1 with a boundary com-  
ponent γ1;  
Ensure: M1 is glued with a planar annulus M2;  
Trace γ1 to obtain an ordered sequence of oriented  
edges e1  
1, e1  
2, . . . , e1  
n;  
Normalize M1 such that the total length of γ1 is 1;  
Decompose the unit circle γ2 to e2  
1, e2  
2, . . . , e2  
n, such  
that the arc length of e2  
k equals to the length of e1  
k;  
Construct an inner circle γ3 centered at the origin  
with radius δ <1;  
Generate a planar triangulation bounded by γ2 and  
γ3 using Delaunay refinement algorithm to obtain a  
triangle mesh M2;  
Glue M1 and M2 by identifying e1  
k ∈ γ1 and e2  
k ∈ γ2,  
the result mesh is M with well defined edge length;  
return the welded triangle mesh M .  
4.4 Discrete Uniformization First, we compute  
the discrete conformal metric by setting the target cur-  
vature satisfying the Gauss-Bonnet condition. The tar-  
get curvatures for interior vertices are zeros. Suppose  
∂M = γ0-γ1-· · ·-γn, for an interior boundary compo-  
nent γi with ni vertices, we set the target curvature for  
each vertex on γi as -2π/ni. For the exterior boundary  
component γ0 with n0 vertices, we set the target vertex  
on γ0 as 2π/n0, this will ensure the planar image of M  
is a convex domain with inner holes. We use Alg. 4 to  
compute the desired metric.  
Once the target metric is obtained, we can isomet-  
rically embed the whole mesh on the plane face by face.  
4.5 Planar Delaunay Refinement The input ob-  
ject is a two-dimensional polygonal domain Ω, possibly  
with holes and constraining edges and vertices inside  
Algorithm 4 Discrete Surface Ricci Flow  
Require: Triangle mesh M , target curvature ¯K  
Ensure: Discrete Conformal Factor λ  
Initialize λi ← 0, for all vi ∈ V  
while true do  
Update edge length using vertex scaling Eqn. (3.5)  
Update triangulation to be Delauny by edge flips  
Update corner angles using Eqn. (3.2)  
Update vertex curvature using Eqn. (3.4)  
if max | ¯Ki - Ki| < ε then  
Return λ  
end if  
Compute the gradient ∇E = ( ¯Ki - Ki)  
Compute the Hessian matrix H Eqn. (3.8)  
Solve linear system Hµ = ∇E  
Update the conformal factor λ ← λ - µ  
end while  
the domain. The boundary ∂Ω is a set of vertices and  
edges which separates the interior of Ω from its exte-  
rior. ∂Ω is a planar straight line graph (PSLG). We  
want to generate a mesh T of Ω, such that T contains  
good quality triangles. In order to obtain a good quality  
mesh, it is necessary for T to include additional points,  
called Steiner points, vertices of the mesh that are not  
vertices of the input PSLG. We want the total number  
of Steiner points to be as small as possible.  
Various approaches have been developed for this  
purpose, such as advancing-front methods, quadtree  
methods, Delaunay-based methods, [4, 21], and the  
combinations of them. Most of them work well in  
practice but come with no guarantee on the quality  
and size of the generated mesh. The algorithm we  
use is Delaunay refinement proposed by Chew [4] and  
Ruppert [21]. It is a simple technique to incrementally  
placing Steiner points at the circumcenters of bad-  
quality Delaunay triangles.  
A circumcenter of a triangle may lie outside the  
domain. When it happens, at least a boundary edge  
(segment) is very close to some existing vertices. Call  
a vertex encroaches upon a segment if it lies inside its  
diametrical circumcircle. The algorithic details is given  
in the Alg. 5.  
5 Experimental Results  
All algorithms have been developed using generic C++  
under Visual Studio 2022 on the Windows platform. All  
the experiments are conducted on a laptop with Intel(R)  
Core(TM) i7-10750H CPU @2.60GHz with 6 cores and  
64GB of memory.  
We have tested our proposed method in real car  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 8 =====  
Figure 4: The whole remeshed car model. Left: front view, right: back view.  
Algorithm 5 Delaunay Refinement (Ω, θmin)  
Require: A 2d polygonal domain Ω; the desired mini-  
mal angle of output triangles θmin  
Ensure: A mesh T of Ω  
Construct an initial Delaunay mesh T of ∂Ω;  
while ∃τ ∈ Tand MinAngle(τ ) > θmin do  
let c be the circumcenter of τ ;  
if c encroaches upon any segment of T then  
split an encroached segment;  
else  
insert c into the Delaunay mesh T ;  
end if  
end while  
models for fluid dynamics simulation. As shown in  
Fig. 4, the initial CAD model is converted to a triangle  
mesh, after hole filling, defeaturing and other prepro-  
cessing steps, the input mesh is a water-tight manifold  
with 15 , 013k faces. By surface remeshing, the surface  
triangulation quality has been improved prominently  
and the number of faces is reduced to 3, 398k. As shown  
in Fig. 4, the sampling density is adapted to the geome-  
try of the model and the requirement of the simulation.  
For example, the back surface of the mirror is highly  
curved, hence the sampling is denser. The triangula-  
tions of regions of the body fascia front, the handles  
and the wheel rims are refined since they are more im-  
portant for CFD simulation. Experiments show that  
with the same level of accuracy, the number of cells in  
the tetrahedral final mesh is reduced by 43 .56%, and  
the volumetric mesh generation is 3 .29 times faster, the  
CFD simulation is 3 .47 times faster.  
Fig. 5 shows the topological and geometric complex-  
ities of the car model. Some mechanical parts have very  
high genus, and some geometric structures are highly  
refined and almost self-intersecting. Our proposed algo-  
rithm can partition high genus surfaces into poly-annuli  
automatically, preserve sharp geometric features, and  
avoid self-intersections.  
Fig. 7 shows parts of the suspension system: in  
the first row, the left frame displays the original model  
and the right frame shows the planar image of the  
welded surface under the conformal mapping; in the  
second row, the right frame shows the planar image of  
the model with the welded annulus removed, the left  
frame demonstrates the conformality of the mapping by  
checkerboard texture mapping; the third row compares  
the initial low mesh quality (left frame) and the high  
mesh quality of the remeshing result (right frame).  
Similarly, Fig. 8 and Fig. 6 show the remeshing process  
of the radiator shell and part of the chassis (of a different  
car) respectively.  
Figure 5: The remeshed car model (the bottom view).  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 9 =====  
Fig. 9 demonstrates a challenging case. The genus  
of the input brake surface is 83, the conventional surface  
segmentation algorithm will decompose it input 246  
pairs of pants, and each patch is relatively small, hence  
the whole processing in inefficient. In this case, we  
compute the mid-plane of the model, which cut through  
all the handles and divide the surface into two halves,  
each half is a genus zero surface with 84 boundary  
components. The dynamic Ricci flow combined with  
the conformal welding technique can handle this type of  
poly-annulus without any difficulty. The first row right  
frame shows the image of conformal parameterization  
of the welded model. The second row right frame shows  
the planar image of the brake model only, the left frame  
shows the conformality of the mapping by checkerboard  
texture mapping. The third row compares the original  
meshing (left frame) and the remeshed result (right  
frame). This example shows the proposed method can  
handle surfaces with complicated topologies.  
Table 1 summarizes the statistics of our experi-  
ments. We selected some representative mechanical  
parts of the car body, and give the running time for con-  
formal parameterization step and the remeshing step.  
The table also gives the comparison between the geo-  
metric complexity of the original mesh and the remeshed  
mesh in terms of the numbers of vertices and faces.  
Finally, we evaluate the mesh quality based on  
angles and skewness. The skewness here refers to the  
measure of the deformation of individual triangles in  
a mesh. In general, low skewness values indicate well-  
shaped elements that are closer to ideal shapes, while  
high skewness values suggest distorted elements.  
Figure 6: One part of the car chassis.  
Figure 7: The car suspension part.  
Model #Vertices #Faces Param. Remesh  
Suspension 7 87k/23k 173k/43k 3m40s 6s  
Shield 2 134k/59k 263k/113k 6m39s 18s  
Shell 8 263k/69k 524k/137k 8m15s 36s  
Chassis 6 338k/81k 673k/158k 11m21s 25s  
Brake 9 804k/175k 1572k/315k 34m48s 5m31s  
Table 1: Runtimes of the parameterization step and  
remeshing step on the selective parts of a car model, the  
numbers before and after slash represent the numbers  
of the cells in original model and remeshed model  
respectively.  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 10 =====  
Figure 8: One part of the radiator shell.  
Figure 9: The brake block of the car.  
Fig. 10 displays a histogram illustrating mesh qual-  
ity in terms of angles and skewness of the original and  
remeshed car models. The vertical axis represents the  
proportion rather than the quantity, offering a quan-  
titative insight into the distribution. The remeshed  
mesh exhibits superior quality compared to the original  
mesh, characterized by a higher concentration of angles  
near 60 degrees and a greater prevalence of triangles  
approaching the ideal regular triangle.  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 11 =====  
(a). angle evaluation  
(b). skewness evaluation  
Figure 10: The comparison of mesh quality before and  
after remeshing for the car model. Blue: the result of  
original surface; Orange: the result of remeshing result.  
6 Conclusion  
This work proposal a practical algorithm to improve  
the robustness of surface remeshing based on conformal  
welding technique. The input surface is a topological  
annulus, it is welded with a topological cylinder along  
one of its boundary component, and flattened onto a  
convex planar domain. This guarantees the conformal  
parameterization of the input surface is an embedding,  
so that the planar image can be triangulated using clas-  
sical planar Delaunay refinement algorithm, the planar  
triangulation is pulled back to the original surface to  
produce high quality surface triangulation. Our experi-  
ments on real car models demonstrate the effectiveness  
of the proposed method.  
In the future, we will explore further to generalize  
the method to surfaces with more complicated topolo-  
gies.  
Acknowledgement  
This research was supported by the National Natural  
Science Foundation of China T2225012, 61936002, Na-  
tional Institutes of Health grant #R21EB029733 and  
National Science Foundation grant #2213852.  
References  
[1] Alliez, P., Desbrun, M.: Progressive meshes. In: Pro-  
ceedings of the 28th Annual Conference on Com-  
puter Graphics and Interactive Techniques. pp. 99-108  
(2001)  
[2] Berg, M.d., Cheong, O., Kreveld, M.v., Overmars, M.:  
Computational Geometry: Algorithms and Applica-  
tions. Springer-Verlag TELOS, Santa Clara, CA, USA,  
3rd ed. edn. (2008)  
[3] Cheng, S.W., Dey, T.K., Shewchuk, J.R.: Delaunay  
Mesh Generation. CRC Press (2010)  
[4] Chew, L.P.: Guaranteed-quality triangular meshes.  
Tech. Rep. TR 89-983, Dept. of Comp. Sci., Cornell  
University (1989)  
[5] Chow, B.: The Ricci flow on the 2-sphere. J. Differen-  
tial Geom. 33(2), 325-334 (1991)  
[6] Du, Q., Faber, V., Gunzburger, M.: Centroidal voronoi  
tessellations: Applications and algorithms. SIAM Re-  
view 41, 637-676 (1999)  
[7] Edelsbrunner, H., Harer, J.L.: Computational Topol-  
ogy: An Introduction. American Mathematical Society  
(2010)  
[8] Garland, M., Heckbert, P.S.: Surface simplification  
using quadric error metrics. In: Proceedings of the  
24th Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and  
Interactive Techniques. pp. 209-216 (1997)  
[9] Gary P. T. Choi, Yusan Leung-Liu, X.G., Lui, L.M.:  
Parallelizable global conformal parameterization of  
simply-connected surfaces via partial welding. SIAM  
Imaging Sciences 13(3), 1049-1083 (2010)  
[10] Gu, X., Guo, R., Luo, F., Sun, J., Wu, T.: A  
discrete uniformization theorem for polyhedral surfaces  
i. Journal of Differential Geometry (JDG)109(3), 431-  
466 (2018)  
[11] Gu, X., Luo, F., Sun, J., Wu, T.: A discrete uni-  
formization theorem for polyhedral surfaces i. Jour-  
nal of Differential Geometry (JDG) 109(2), 223-256  
(2018)  
[12] Gu, X., Yau, S.T.: Computational Conformal Geome-  
try, Advanced Lectures in Mathematics, vol. 3. Inter-  
national Press and Higher Education Press (2007)  
[13] Gu, X., Yau, S.T.: Computational Conformal Geom-  
etry. International Press and Higher Education Press  
(2020)  
[14] Hamilton, R.: The Ricci Flow on Surfaces. A.M.S.  
Contemp. Math. 71(1), 237-261 (1986)  
[15] Hang Si, N.L., Gu, X.: Surface remeshing based on  
conformal uniformization. In: Proceedings of the SIAM  
International Meshing Roundtable 23 (2023)  
[16] Kazhdan, M., Bolitho, M., Hoppe, H.: Poisson sur-  
face reconstruction. In: Proceedings of the fourth Euro-  
graphics symposium on Geometry processing. pp. 61-  
70 (2006)  
[17] Lok Ming Lui, Wei Zeng, S.T.Y., Gu, X.: Shape anal-  
ysis of planar multiply-connected objects using confor-  
mal welding. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis  
and Machine Intelligence (IEEE TPAMI) 36(7), 1384-  
1401 (2013)  
[18] Perelman, G.: The entropy formula for the  
ricci flow and its geometric applications (2002).  
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.MATH/0211159,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0211159  
[19] Perelman, G.: Ricci flow with  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited  
===== page 12 =====  
surgery on three-manifolds (2003).  
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.MATH/0303109,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0303109  
[20] Peyr´ e, J., Oudot, S., Keriven, R., Cohen-Steiner,  
D.: Cgal: Computational geometry algorithms library.  
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS)  
46(3), 1-27 (2020)  
[21] Ruppert, J.: A Delaunay refinement algorithm for  
quality 2-dimensional mesh generation. Journal of Al-  
gorithms 18(3), 548-585 (1995)  
[22] Shewchuk, J.R.: Triangle: Engineering a 2d quality  
mesh generator and delaunay triangulator. In: Applied  
Computational Geometry: Towards Geometric Engi-  
neering. pp. 203-222 (1996)  
Copyright © 2024 by SIAM  
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited