
===== page 1 =====
Integrable Frame Fields using Odeco Tensors
Matt´ eo Couplet∗ Alexandre Chemin∗ Jean-Fran¸ cois Remacle∗
Abstract
We propose a method for computing integrable orthogonal
frame fields on planar surfaces. Frames and their symmetries
are implicitly represented using orthogonally decomposable
(odeco) tensors. To formulate an integrability criterion, we
express the frame field's Lie bracket solely in terms of the
tensor representation; this is made possible by studying the
sensitivity of the frame with respect to perturbations in the
tensor. We construct an energy formulation that computes
smooth and integrable frame fields, in both isotropic and
anisotropic settings. The user can prescribe any size and
orientation constraints in input, and the solver creates and
places the singularities required to fit the constraints with
the correct topology. The computed frame field can be
integrated to a seamless parametrization that is aligned with
the frame field.
1 Introduction
Meshes composed of quadrilaterals are known to offer
superior performance than their triangular counterpart
when used as a support in numerical simulations, how-
ever quad meshers still do not meet the same level of
robustness, flexibility and quality required for industrial
applications as triangular meshes. In three dimensions,
generating fully hexahedral meshes is an even more dif-
ficult task, and their industrial use is consequently very
limited despite a persistent demand from practitioners.
Quadrilateral and hexahedral meshing are challeng-
ing because they couple (a) a geometric problem, mini-
mizing the distortion of the elements, and (b) a combi-
natorial problem, achieving a conforming connectivity
structure. If one also desires a multi-block structure, a
layer of complexity is added, requiring (c) an adequately
coarse block structure. The last two decades have seen
the emergence of field-based approaches, which divide
the problem in two main steps. (1) The combinatorial
constraints are ignored and a frame field is computed; a
frame is a set of 2/3 directions representing the orienta-
tion (and sometimes the size) of a quad/hex. This frame
field can be seen as a continuous extension of a mesh.
(2) A mesh is generated using guidance from the frame
field. This can be done through numerous approaches
which we review below.
∗University of Louvain, Belgium.
An issue shared by most existing works is that no
quad/hex mesh exactly follows the frame field computed
a priori. This is due to the frame field not being
integrable; we elaborate on this in section 2. This
limitation of frame field-based methods means that the
mesh deviates from the frame field and the user must
compromise on element quality, control over element
size and orientation, and control over the topology of
the mesh. A more fundamental issue arises when the
computed frame field has a global topology that is not
meshable, making it unusable. This happens in the
2D case when limit cycles appear; in 3D the singular
structure is very often invalid due to the presence of
non-meshable singular nodes.
Our contribution overcomes this limitation in 2D
and allows to generate frame fields on planar surfaces
that are integrable (Figure 1, left); during this process
the user can prescribe any orientation or size constraints
along feature curves. Integrability guarantees that the
frame field can be integrated to a seamless parametriza-
tion that is exactly aligned with the frame field and re-
spects the prescribed constraints (Figure 1, right). The
parametrization can then be quantized to extract a quad
mesh, or the frame field can be directly used as a guide
to a frontal mesher; we illustrate the latter in our re-
sults.
Our approach relies on orthogonally decomposable
(odeco) tensors which serve as an algebraic representa-
tion for the frames. By studying the so-called eigenvalue
sensitivity problem for tensors, we are able to formulate
the problem completely in terms of this implicit alge-
braic representation. This work is the first achieving
integrability using odeco tensors. As they can be ex-
tended to three dimensions, this contribution paves the
way for hex-meshable frame fields, which are allegedly
the key to the long-standing problem of robustly gener-
ating optimal hexahedral meshes.
1.1 Related work
F rame field design.4-direction fields, i.e., assign-
ments of four directions to every point of a surface, and
their application to quad meshing have been studied
extensively in the computer graphics community; paper
[22] provides a review. Some important works [18, 5]
assume the field topology to be known in advance and
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 2 =====
Figure 1: Overview of the approach on a machine composed of a rotor and stator. (Left) An integrable frame field
is computed respecting user-prescribed size constraints: size of 1 on the inner and outer arcs, and size of 0.3 on the
other boundaries. The frames indicate the local size and orientation of the quadrilateral mesh elements. (Right)
A seamless parametrization is computed by integrating the frame field. Black triangles represent singularities and
thick lines form the cut graph.
optimize for cross field smoothness. If the topology is
unknown, it can be represented explicitly and optimized
through integer variables such as in [2], which often
leads to mixed-integer formulations. Alternatively, the
topology can also be implicitly encoded in the field rep-
resentation; our work fits in this category. Earlier works
in this line of research include [17, 11]. A key challenge
is being able to represent singularities while maintaining
unit norm frames. More recently, this problem has been
re-framed in the Ginzburg-Landau framework, which re-
places the ill-posed unit norm constraint by a penalty
term taken to the limit [1, 23].
Field-guided meshing. As an intermediate step
before generating a quad mesh, a global parametrization
is often computed on the domain using the guidance
from the frame field. Among notable works we can
cite [10, 2] who integrate the frame field in a least-
squares sense to find the parametrization that best
aligns to the frame field, or [17], who perform a curl-
reduction procedure a posteriori. Another approach,
e.g., in [14], is to trace out parametric lines from the
frame field to form quadrilateral patches. Getting a
quad mesh from a global parametrization is typically
done using quantization methods, where a T-mesh is
traced out and its edges are given integer lengths; see,
e.g., [3, 13].
Obtaining a quad mesh from a frame field can also
be achieved robustly using frontal method, by inserting
points with guidance from the frame field. Remeshing
and smoothing is often necessary a posteriori to fix
regions of bad quality; see, e.g., [19], which we use as a
quad mesher in our pipeline.
In this work, the parametrization step is made
trivial as an integrable frame field is equivalent to
a seamless parametrization. Hence, integrating the
frame field provides a parametrization that is exactly
aligned and matches the sizing of the frame field. This
confers the user a complete control over the sizing
and orientation of the mesh, a desirable property that
cannot be achieved through conventional cross field
guided meshing.
F rame representation. Computing frame fields
with implicit topology requires a representation that is
invariant to the ordering and symmetries of the frame
vectors. The majority frame field-driven methods use
representations of unit frames, or crosses, as they only
care about the orientation of the mesh; a review can
be found in [22]. One of the most prominent repre-
sentations is the trigonometric pair (cos(4 θ), sin(4θ))
(or, equivalently, the complex exponential ei4θ) which
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 3 =====
effectively encodes rotational symmetries and is triv-
ially normalized to unit norm [17, 15, 12, 11]. How-
ever, this representation cannot encode sizes along with
the directions. On the other hand, PolyVectors, intro-
duced by [6], encode the frame vectors as the complex
roots of a degree 4 polynomial. They have the advan-
tage that they can represent non-orthogonal frames (as
done in [21]), but they offer no straightforward exten-
sion to volumetric frames. For representing 3D frames,
a spherical function is often used that is maximal in the
directions of the frame. This function is encoded by
its coefficients in the basis of spherical harmonics [8].
As highlighted by [4], it can also be interpreted as a
4th-order tensor. Recently, Palmer et al. [16] have pro-
posed an extension of these representations that encodes
sizes along the directions, relying on the so-called or-
thogonally decomposable (Odeco) tensors. As they are
the only known representation that can encode three-
dimensional orthogonal and scaled frames, we propose
to use them in the 2D setting so that they can offer a
3D extension for later work.
Integrable frame fields. Motivated by the issue
where the mesh is not aligned to the computed frame
field, a handful of works have focused on computing
frame fields that are integrable, i.e., the direction vectors
are the gradients of a seamless parametrization. This
property holds if the two vector fields are curl-free.
Diamanti et al. [7] achieve this using PolyVector fields.
Unlike our approach, the integrability condition cannot
be expressed in terms of the PolyVector coefficients,
and the optimization is done on the explicit direction
vectors. In [21], PolyVector fields are used to construct
so-called Chebyshev nets, i.e., quadrilateral meshes with
a uniform size but not necessarily orthogonal. Our
goal is slightly different (orthogonal quad meshing) but
we address the same challenges regarding control of
size and orientation. Like us, they optimize a frame
field instead of a parametrization Jacobian, and express
the integrability through the Lie bracket. The main
advantage of odeco tensors compared to PolyVectors is
that the former offer a natural extension to 3D frame
fields.
In [9], an integrable frame field is computed given a
user-imposed (or pre-computed) singularity configura-
tion. The frame fields are exactly integrable and the
method can even remove limit cycles that appear in
most field-based approaches. Having to specify singu-
larities however is a significant limitation, especially in
the 3D case where almost all existing frame field solvers
produce invalid singular configurations.
1.2 Overview In section 2 we review the mathemat-
ical formalism behind parametrizations, their Jacobians
and frame fields. We define the integrability property
for frame fields and show how they are equivalent to
seamless parametrizations. In section 3, we review the
algebraic representation for our frames, which is the
two-dimensional version of the odeco tensors proposed
by [16]. In section 4, we present two contributions: (a)
an expression for the sensitivity of a higher-order ten-
sor's eigenvectors with respect to small perturbations
of the tensor, and we use this result to show (b) an ex-
pression of a frame field's Lie bracket only in terms of
the tensor field coefficients and their derivatives. In sec-
tion 5 we present a last contribution, an energy formu-
lation that optimizes for smooth integrable frame fields,
for both the isotropic and anisotropic cases. In sec-
tion 6 we briefly present our pipeline to compute a seam-
less parametrization from an integrable frame field, and
in section 7 we demonstrate the effectiveness of the al-
gorithm.
2 Integrable frame fields
Seamless parametrizations. The idea of
parametrization-based quadrilateral meshing is to map
a coordinate system onto the domain to be meshed.
The coordinate lines of this map then provide, at least
locally, a quadrilateral mesh on the domain. Consider
a planar domain Ω; we wish to parametrize Ω by
assigning to each point p of Ω a pair of coordinates
(u(p), v(p)). In general, this parametrization cannot
be defined as a global continuous function; cuts need to
be introduced to obtain a disk topology on which u and
v can be defined continuously. The parametrization is
said to be seamless if across every cut, the coordinates
transform through a rigid rotation of some multiple of
90◦; if u′ and v′ are the coordinates on the other side
of the cut, then the transformation is seamless if
(2.1)
u′
v′

=
 0 1
-1 0

| {z }
R
k 
u
v

+

s
t

,
for some k ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} and fixed translation ( s, t). If,
on top of being seamless, the translation ( s, t) is integer
and the singularities lie at integer coordinates, then
the parametrization is called an integer-grid map and
exactly corresponds to a quadrilateral mesh.
Computing seamless parametrizations is a challeng-
ing task due to the discrete nature of the cut graph
involved, which is unknown a priori. Instead, most ex-
isting works focus on computing the Jacobian (∇u, ∇v)
of a parametrization. Let ( du, dv) be a pair of vector
fields on Ω; they form the Jacobian of a parametrization
(and are said to be integrable) if they are curl-free:
(2.2) ∇ ×du = 0, ∇ ×dv = 0,
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 4 =====
and they transform through a 90 ◦-multiple rotation
across cuts (which amounts to differentiating (2.1)):
(2.3)
du′
dv′

= Rk
du
dv

.
If these properties are verified then the vector fields
(du, dv) are essentially equivalent to a seamless
parametrization, up to a global rigid rotation of the co-
ordinate map. Computing a parametrization's Jacobian
is a more doable task, provided one can appropriately
encode the symmetries in (2.3); we elaborate on that
in section 3.
F rame fields. Consider now the inverse of the
parametrization r that maps a pair of coordinates to
point of the domain: p = r(u, v). This map can only
be defined locally since the parametrization can map
different points to the same coordinates. The Jacobian
matrix of r defines the coordinate vectors u and v:
(2.4) Jr =

∂r
∂u
∂r
∂v

=
 u v 
,
forming a coordinate frame F =
 u v 
. Since r is
the inverse of the parametrization, their Jacobians are
inverse of one another, meaning that the coordinate
frame is the inverse of the parametrization's Jacobian:
(2.5) Jr-1 = (Jr)-1 ⇒
∇u
∇v

= F-1.
Note that, looking at the off-diagonal terms in F-1F =
I, we have ∇u · v = ∇v · u = 0, meaning that the
coordinate vectors u, v are orthogonal to the gradients
of v, u, respectively, and therefore parallel to the isolines
of v, urespectively. This shows how the frame field
corresponds to a quad mesh through discrete isolines
of the coordinate map u, v. Looking at the diagonal
terms, we have ∇u · u = ∇v · v = 1, which indicates
that the integer isolines are spaced out according to ∥u∥
and ∥v∥. We illustrate the introduced concepts and
notations on Figure 2.
Orthogonal case. In this work we are interested
in frames that are orthogonal: u ⊥ v. Let ˆ u= u/∥u∥
and ˆ v= v/∥v∥; the frame matrix F is then diagonal in
the local orthonormal basis ( ˆ u, ˆ v):
(2.6)

∇u
∇v

=

∥u∥ 0
0 ∥v∥
-1
=

1/∥u∥ 0
0 1 /∥v∥

.
The Jacobian of the coordinate map can thus be com-
puted by simply scaling the frame's coordinate vectors:
∇u = u/∥u∥2 and ∇v = v/∥v∥2.
u
v
u/uni2032 
v/uni2032 
/uni2207u
/uni2207v
/uni2207u/uni2032 
/uni2207v/uni2032 
cut line
Figure 2: A seamless parametrization across a cut.
The isolines of the coordinate maps u(p) and v(p) are
depicted in red and blue, respectively. Notice how the
gradients ∇u, ∇v and the frame vectors u, v undergo a
90◦ rotation as they cross the cut.
F rame field integrability . Several previous
works, e.g., [7], build upon the curl-free condition (2.2)
and compute parametrizations by computing vector
fields (du, dv). However, in our case we want to be able
to express the integrability condition directly in terms
of our implicit frame representation, and expressing the
individual curls of du and dv is not possible as the two
vectors are mixed in a single algebraic representation.
Instead, we compute a frame field F and rely on the
analogous statement: a frame field F =
 u v 
guides
a parametrization (and is integrable) if its Lie bracket
[u, v] vanishes:
(2.7) [ u, v] = ∇uv - ∇vu = 0,
where ∇u and ∇u are directional derivatives, and
this parametrization is seamless if the frame vectors
transform through 90◦ rotations across cuts, as in (2.3).
We will see in section 4 how the Lie bracket can be
expressed in terms of the implicit frame representation.
3 Algebraic representation of frames
Due to the topology of the domain Ω and the presence of
singularities in the frame field, it is not possible to define
a globally continuous frame field ( u, v). One needs to
introduce cuts in the domain across which the frame
vectors are symmetric according the rotations defined
by (2.3). In order to compute a frame field without the
need to introduce cuts, we extend the notion of frame
such that it is invariant up to 90 ◦ rotations:
(3.8) F = {(u, v), (v, -u), (-u, -v), (-v, u)}.
These symmetries are illustrated in Figure 3. Given this
equivalence class, one needs to introduce an algebraic
representation that unambiguously represents a frame
and supports arithmetic operations. To this end we re-
sort to the class of two-dimensional orthogonally decom-
posable (or Odeco) tensors, which were introduced by
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 5 =====
uv v
-u
-v-u -v
u
Figure 3: Equivalence class of the 90 ◦ rotations of an
orthogonal frame ( u, v).
Palmer et al. [16] in the three-dimensional case. In this
section we briefly lay out the theory of odeco tensors,
and refer the reader to the paper for more details.
Odeco tensors. Although the odeco theory ap-
plies to tensors of arbitrary order, we restrict the def-
initions to fourth-order tensors, as they are sufficient
to represent frames. Let S4(Rn) be the space of
n × n × n × n fully symmetric tensors , i.e., their real
entries Ti1,i2,i3,i4 are invariant up to permutations of
the indices i1, i2, i3, i4. n is the dimension of the tensor
and corresponds to the dimension of the frame we wish
to represent (2 or 3). A combinatorial inspection shows
that tensor T has 5 independent components for n = 2,
and 15 components for n = 3.
Robeva et al. [20] have studied a special class of
tensors T that are said to be orthogonally decomposable,
or odeco for short, if they can be written as
(3.9) T = λ1v⊗4
1 + · · ·+ λnv⊗4
n ,
where v1, . . . ,vn form an orthonormal basis ofRn. Note
that for second-order tensors, S2(Rn) is the space of real
symmetric matrices; these are always orthogonally de-
composable according to the spectral theorem. Higher-
order tensors ( ≥ 3) however, admit rank-one decompo-
sitions with more than n terms.
The notion of eigenvector can be generalized to
higher-order tensors: w is an eigenvector of T with
eigenvalue λ if
Tw3 = λw, or, in Einstein notation, (3.10)
Ti,j2,j3,j4 wj2 wj3 wj4 = λwi.
One can easily see that, for an odeco tensor T, the vec-
tors vk in (3.9) are eigenvectors ofT with corresponding
eigenvalue λk.
As odeco tensors only form a small subset of the
space of fully symmetric tensors, one needs to charac-
terize what makes a tensor odeco. The major result of
Robeva et al. [20] is the fact that odeco tensors form
an algebraic variety defined by a set of homogeneous
quadratic equations in the tensor coefficients. More pre-
cisely, T is odeco if the contraction ( T ∗ T) defined by
(3.11) ( T ∗ T)i1,i2,i3,j1,j2,j3 = Ti1,i2,i3,sTj1,j2,j3,s
is a fully symmetric tensor, i.e.,
(3.12) T ∗ T ∈ S6(Rn).
F rames as odeco tensors. To represent a 2D
orthogonal frame in a way that is invariant to the
permutations in (3.8), we use an odeco tensor of which
the eigenvalues and eigenvectors, as defined in (3.10),
match the frame directions and sizes. Specifically, let
u, v be the frame vectors, λ, µtheir norms and ˆ u, ˆ v
their normalization such that u = λˆ u, v = µˆ v. Then
the corresponding tensor is defined as
(3.13) T = λˆ u⊗4 + µˆ v⊗4.
Notice how this tensor remains the same when plugging
in any of the rotations of (3.8). We can now justify
the choice for a fourth-order tensor: an even order is
required for the tensor to be invariant to the signs of
the vectors, and order 2 cannot be chosen since, in the
case λ = µ, the tensor degenerates to a multiple of the
identity matrix, T = λI, and then any vector of R2 is
an eigenvector of T and one loses the direction vectors
ˆ u, ˆ v. Order 4 is therefore the lowest possible order for
our purpose.
Polynomial representation of tensors. There
is a one-to-one correspondence between 4th-order fully
symmetric tensors of dimension n, and degree 4 homo-
geneous polynomials of n variables, given by
(3.14) pT(x1, . . . , xn) = Ti1,i2,i3,i4 xi1 xi2 xi3 xi4 .
Since it is homogeneous, one can restrict this polynomial
to the sphere Sn-1, since
(3.15) pT(x) = ∥x∥4 pT
 x
∥x∥

.
We can therefore define a function pT(θ) such that
pT(x) = ∥x∥4 pT(θ); this function is periodic with
period π, since pT(x) = pT(-x). Such a function can
be conveniently visualized by taking a unit circle and
virtually stretching it according to the value that pT
takes on the circle; formally, one draws the parametric
curve given by r(θ) = pT(θ) for θ ∈ [0, 2π[. We show
this on Figure 4.
A natural way to encode this polynomial is to
decompose it into an orthonormal basis of functions on
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 6 =====
Figure 4: Polynomial representation pT(θ) of (left) an
arbitrary tensor, and (right) an odeco tensor, with the
corresponding frame vectors. Green represents positive
values for pT(θ) and magenta represents negative values.
1√
2π
1√π cos(2θ)
 1√π sin(2θ)
 1√π cos(4θ)
 1√π sin(4θ)
Figure 5: Orthonormal basis of circular harmonics used
to represent odeco tensor polynomials. Green represents
positive values for pT(θ) and magenta represents negative
values.
the sphere Sn-1. Considering the two-dimensional case
n = 2, pT(θ) can be decomposed into the Fourier series
(3.16)
pT(θ) = 1√
2π q0 + 1√π cos(2θ) q1 + 1√π sin(2θ) q2
+ 1√π cos(4θ) q3 + 1√π sin(4θ) q4,
where q = ( q0, . . . , q4) fully describes the polynomial
and its corresponding tensor. These basis functions,
shown in Figure 5, correspond to two-dimensional spher-
ical harmonics and are sometimes called circular har-
monics. The number of five is not surprising since
the original tensor has five independent components:
T1111, T1112, T1122, T1222 and T2222. The change of ba-
sis from T to q is done through a linear transformation,
which can be derived by matching expressions (3.14)
and (3.16).
Eigenvectors and eigenvalues of higher-order ten-
sors, defined in (3.10), can be interpreted in the polyno-
mial representation through the following property: w
is an eigenvector of T with eigenvalue λ if and only if
(3.17) ∇pT(w) = 4 λ w.
In other words, the eigenvectors of T correspond to the
stationary points of pT(θ).
Algebraic variety in the 2D case. A 2D fourth-
order tensor is completely defined by a set of five
Figure 6: Range of isotropic tensors, the middle one being
odeco. All tensors have a set of 4 eigenvectors with the same
eigenvalues.
coefficients ( q0, . . . , q4). This tensor corresponds to a
frame if the tensor is odeco, i.e., it lies on the algebraic
variety defined by the set of quadratic equations (3.12).
In the 2D case ( n = 2), we can write out this set
of equations and change the basis to q, and derive
the following set of linearly independent equations that
define the variety:
(3.18)



c1(q) = q2
0 - 18(q2
3 + q2
4) = 0
c2(q) =
√
2q0q1 - 6q1q3 - 6q2q4 = 0
c3(q) =
√
2q0q2 - 6q1q4 + 6q2q3 = 0
Area of a frame. The optimization we perform on
the frame field requires to normalize the integrability
condition to make it independent of the size of the
frame. We choose to do this normalization with the
area of the frame, i.e., the product of the sizes a = λµ.
This can be interpreted as the local area of the quad
elements in the frame's neighborhood. One can show
that it can be expressed only in terms of the circular
harmonics coefficients q:
(3.19) a(q) = λµ = 1
π
 8
9 q2
0 - (q2
1 + q2
2)

.
We show later in Section 5 how this expression is used
to normalize the integrability condition.
Isotropic case. A frame is isotropic, i.e., its vec-
tors have equal length λ = µ, if its degree 2 coefficients
are zero: q1 = q2 = 0. The algebraic variety reduces
to a single quadratic equation c1(q) = 0. When the de-
gree 2 coefficients are zero, the tensor eigenvectors are
always orthogonal, even if the tensor is not odeco. A
range of isotropic tensors is illustrated on Figure 6. We
see that in the general non-odeco case, this class has an
additional degree of freedom depending on how close it
is to a sphere. We explain in section 7 how this extra
degree of freedom is beneficial as it allows to represent
singularities.
4 Integrability condition
Since there is a one-to-one correspondence between
frames (as defined in (3.8)) and orthogonally decom-
posable (odeco) tensors with positive eigenvalues (as de-
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 7 =====
fined in (3.13)), one can express the integrability condi-
tion (2.7) solely in terms of the odeco tensor coefficients
and their spatial derivatives. In this section we show
how we derive the closed-form expression for the Lie
bracket.
Consider a frame F =

Rk(u, v), k = 0, 1, 2, 3
	
,
where R performs a 90◦ rotation as defined in (2.1) and
illustrated in Figure 3. Every pair of vectors in F has
the same Lie bracket, which we denote Lie( F):
(4.20) Lie( F) = [Rku, Rkv], k = 0, 1, 2, 3.
First we write the Lie bracket [ u, v] in index notation:
(4.21) [ u, v]i = uα
∂vi
∂xα
- vα
∂ui
∂xα
.
Let T denote the odeco tensor corresponding to F. We
apply the chain rule to express the spatial derivatives
on the tensor coefficients:
(4.22)
[u, v]i = uα
∂vi
∂Tj1j2j3j4
∂Tj1j2j3j4
∂xα
-vα
∂ui
∂Tj1j2j3j4
∂Tj1j2j3j4
∂xα
.
In the remaining of the section we show how (a) the
sensitivity terms ∂vi/∂Tj and ∂ui/∂Tj are derived, and
(b) how the Lie bracket is completely expressed in terms
of the tensor coefficients T.
Eigenvalue sensitivity for tensors. Recall that
u, v are eigenvectors of T as defined by (3.10). Finding
the sensitivity terms ∂vi/∂Tj and ∂ui/∂Tj can be
done by analyzing how the eigenvectors u, v change
when adding an infinitesimal perturbation δT to the
tensor. This analysis is well-known for matrices as the
eigenvalue perturbation problem, but can be generalized
to higher-order tensors, provided they are odeco. We
leave the complete derivation in appendix A and retain
the main result: if ( λ, ˆ w) is an eigenpair of odeco tensor
T, then the sensitivity of w = λ ˆ wwith respect to a
perturbation δT is given by
(4.23) δw = (δT) ˆ w3.
From this result we find that the partial derivatives are
given by
(4.24) ∂wi
∂Tj1j2j3j4
= δij1 ˆwj2 ˆwj3 ˆwj4 ,
where δij is the Kronecker delta symbol. Note that an
eigenvector's sensitivity only depends on itself and not
on the other eigenvectors of the odeco tensor.
Lie bracket in terms of tensor representa-
tion. We now wish to find an expression for the Lie
bracket (4.22) so that it only depends on the tensor co-
efficients T and not on the frame directions u, v. Plug-
ging in the sensitivity result (4.24) yields
(4.25)
[u, v]i = (∥u∥ˆuαˆvj2 ˆvj3 ˆvj4 - ∥v∥ˆvk ˆuj2 ˆuj3 ˆuj4 ) ∂Tij2j3j4
∂xα
.
We see that an expression close to the odeco tensor
definition (3.13) starts to appear. The last ingredient is
to note that ˆ uand ˆ vare related by a 90◦ rotation, which
can be written an ˆvi = ϵij ˆuj and ˆui = -ϵij ˆvj, where ϵij
is the two-dimensional Levi-Civita symbol. Plugging
this into the Lie bracket expression and identifying the
tensor coefficients yields
(4.26) Lie( T)i = ϵj2k2 ϵj3k3 ϵj4k4 Tαk2k3k4
∂Tij2j3j4
∂xα
.
As the tensor coefficients T are a linear transformation
of the polynomial coefficients q, one can express the Lie
bracket in terms of q only:
(4.27) Lie( q)i = Cijkα qk
∂qj
∂xα
,
where the Cijkα are known coefficients. This expression
is a key result of this work as it allows to compute
an integrability metric that does not involve the frame
vectors, but instead a quadratic function of the implicit
tensor representation.
5 Optimization
We design an optimization formulation that aims at
making the Lie bracket (4.27) as close to zero as
possible, with odeco tensors (3.18) having positive sizes
(λ, µ >0). To do so we define the following energy
functionals on the domain Ω:
ELie[q] =
Z
Ω
∥Lie(q)∥2
a(q)2 dx ,(5.28)
Eodeco[q] =
3X
i=1
Z
Ω
ci(q)2 dx,(5.29)
ED[q] =
5X
j=1
1
2
Z
Ω
∥∇qj∥2 dx .(5.30)
The normalized Lie bracket energy ELie aims at making
the frame field integrable, the odeco penalty Eodeco at
keeping the tensors odeco, and the Dirichlet energy ED
strives for smoothness of the frame field (Palmer et
al. [16] have shown that, since the L2 distance on q
corresponds to the L2 distance between the polynomials
pT, the Dirichlet energy is an adequate proxy for the
smoothness of the frame field). The area expression
a(q) in the denominator of the Lie bracket energy acts
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 8 =====
as a normalization: ELie does not depend on the global
scale of the frame field, i.e., for a constant factor α,
ELie(αq) = ELie(q). It also acts as a barrier, preventing
the frame sizes λ and µ from becoming zero or negative,
provided the initial solution has positive sizes. The Lie
bracket energy and the odeco penalty are assembled
in a Ginzburg-Landau-like functional, and the Dirichlet
energy acts as a regularizer:
(5.31)
min
q
Eκ[q] = (1 - κ) ELie[q] + κ ED[q] + 1
ϵ2 Eodeco[q].
Parameter ϵ has units of length and, like in the
Ginzburg-Landau functional, controls the size of the
singularity neighborhoods where the frames drift away
from the odeco variety. A schedule is set on κ such that
it starts at 1, providing a smooth (but not integrable)
frame field, and is gradually reduced to 0 to enforce
integrability. As there is an infinite space of integrable
solutions, we found that the Dirichlet regularization pre-
vents the solver from drifting too far away from smooth
solutions.
Discretization. The frame field is discretized on a
standard triangle mesh over Ω. At each node we store
the five circular harmonics coefficients q = (q0, . . . , q4).
The coefficients are then linearly interpolated on the
mesh using continuous P1 triangular finite elements.
The energy functionals are then evaluated using a
standard 3-point quadrature rule on the triangles. Note
that we are using a continuous approximation for the
frame field even though the actual field is not defined at
the singularities and therefore cannot be represented by
our discretization. This justifies our weak enforcement
of the odeco constraint through a penalty term: it allows
the creation of singularities in a way that does not blow
up the integrability energy ELie, by using tensors which
have no preferential directions, i.e., a ball as in Figure 5,
left.
Behavior of ELie at singularities. Since we are
using a continuous representation for the frame field,
a legitimate concern is whether the Lie bracket energy
ELie remains bounded around singularities. To analyze
this we compute an exactly integrable frame field around
a singularity of index i; this frame field is given in polar
coordinates by
(5.32)
u(r, θ) = ri (cos((1 - i)θ) ˆ er - sin((1 - i)θ) ˆ eθ),
v(r, θ) = ri (sin((1 - i)θ) ˆ er + cos((1 - i)θ) ˆ eθ).
Notice that the size ri vanishes at the singularity for
i >0 (valence 3 and less) and blows up fori <0 (valence
5 and more). One can check that this frame field indeed
has zero Lie bracket. We represent this frame field on
finite element meshes of varying sizes and evaluate both
10 2
 10 1
0.000
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
0.150
H(q) dx
val 5
val 3
10 2
 10 1
mesh size
10 1
100
101
102
103
maxx
H(q)
Figure 7: Convergence of the Lie bracket energy ELie
around singularities of valence 5 and 3. H(q) denotes the
integrand of ELie: H(q) = ∥Lie(q)∥2/a(q)2.
the total energy ELie as well as the maximum value
of the integrand; this is shown on Figure 7. We see
that even though the value of the integrand blows up
when refining the mesh, the energy remains bounded
and converges to a fixed value for both singularities.
The energy is higher for a valence 5 singularity than
a valence 3 since the size is unbounded. This property
makes it possible for our solver to introduce singularities
whatever the mesh size, if they make the frame field
more integrable.
Recovering a frame field. The minimization
of (5.31) provides a field of tensors that is odeco every-
where except in the vicinity of singularities. We recover
a frame at every node of the mesh in two steps: first,
the tensors are projected onto the odeco variety using
the projector of [16], using a semidefinite relaxation of
the exact projection problem. This operation results in
a set of frames of which we only keep the direction vec-
tors ˆ u, ˆ v. In a second step, the sizes of the direction
vectors are computed by contracting the tensor 4 times,
as if they were eigenvectors:
(5.33) λ = Tˆ u4, µ = Tˆ v4.
We found that this approach for recovering sizes pro-
vided better results than using the sizes given by the
projector; this is because the Lie bracket is expressed in
terms of the eigenvectors and eigenvalues of the odeco
tensor field.
The optimization procedure to compute an inte-
grable frame field is summarized in Algorithm 1.
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 9 =====
Algorithm 1 Integrable frame field solver
Input: A triangle mesh on a planar geometry, with
size and/or orientation constraints on boundaries
Output: A smooth integrable frame field
On boundaries, assign frames respecting constraints.
In interior, assign zero frames.
Compute T and q using (3.13).
for κ in [1, 10-1, 10-2, 10-3, 10-4, 0] do
q ← argminqEκ[q] using L-BFGS. (5.31)
end for
for each node do
Recover directions ˆ u, ˆ vusing projection of [16].
Recover frame sizes λ, µusing (5.33).
end for
6 F rame field guided parametrization and
meshing
We briefly review how a seamless parametrization is
computed from the frame field F(x) obtained through
the optimization of (5.31); for a more detailed treatment
we refer to, e.g., [2].
We compute a field-guided seamless parametriza-
tion with the following steps:
Singularity detection. Singular triangles are identi-
fied by calculating the turning number of the frames
around a given triangle; this number is +1 /4 or
-1/4 for a singularity of valence 3 and 5, respec-
tively.
Cut graph. The triangle mesh is "cut open" such that
a closed curve cannot turn around a singularity
without crossing the cut graph. The singular trian-
gles also belong to the cut graph (the parametriza-
tion is not defined on them).
F rame vectors assignment. Thanks to the cut
graph, two vectors u and v can be chosen from
each frame to form two continuous vector fields
u(x) and v(x).
Integration. The vector fields are integrated to scalar
potentials u(x) and v(x) by solving the least-
squares problem
(6.34)
min
u(x)
v(x)
Z
Ω


∇u - u
∥u∥2

2
+
∇v - v
∥v∥2

2
 dx .
During this optimization, the parametrization is
constrained to be seamless, meaning that (i) on
the boundary, one of the potentials u or v is
constant, and (ii) along each cut, the matching
potential gradients are equal (which amounts to
impose (2.3)). These seamlessness constraints can
be written as linear constraint on the unknowns
which are straightforward to impose.
We call the residual of the optimization objec-
tive (6.34) the integration error ; it quantifies how in-
tegrable the frame field was, and in general how well
the parametrization aligns to the prescribed frame field.
Achieving a small integration error means we can ade-
quately control the size and orientation constraints in
the seamless parametrization process.
Different approaches, reviewed earlier in section 1,
exist to generate a fully quadrilateral mesh from a
seamless parametrization. In this work we use the quasi-
structured quadrilateral mesher of [19], which consists in
a frontal point insertion coupled with cavity remeshing
and mesh smoothing.
7 Results and Discussion
To demonstrate the validity of our method, we compare
smooth frame fields against integrable frame fields for a
set of geometries where the frame orientations and sizes
are fixed on the boundaries. For each frame field we
compute a parametrization as described in the previous
section, and measure the integration error. For the
integrable frame field we also generate a quadrilateral
mesh using the previously described frontal mesher.
Parameter settings. For each test case we use
a fixed odeco parameter ϵ that has the order of mag-
nitude of the maximum mesh size. The initial so-
lution of the optimization is a smooth field of ten-
sors that are not constrained to be odeco, i.e., κ =
1 and ϵ = ∞. Then a schedule is started on the
reguarization parameter κ, using the following sequence:
(1, 10-1, 10-2, 10-3, 10-4, 0). The first iteration (κ = 1)
corresponds to a pure Ginzburg-Landau functional (this
is the solution we use for smooth frame fields), and at
the last iteration ( κ = 0) the regularizer is removed to
obtain the most integrable frame field. To solve each
optimization problem (5.31) we use a standard quasi-
Newton L-BFGS solver. The integral calculations are
done in parallel over the triangles. For the following
results, the triangular meshes have between 1000 and
4000 nodes. All results have been obtained in less than
3 minutes on a 2 GHz Intel Core i5 CPU on 4 threads.
Comparison. The results of this comparison are
illustrated in Figure 8. On average, the integrable frame
field achieves an integration error 8.6 times smaller than
the smooth frame field. The smooth frame fields do not
have the correct singularity configuration to perform the
required size transition. This causes the corresponding
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 10 =====
Smooth frame field Smooth param . Integrable frame field Integrable param. Quad mesh
(a) Size is 1 at bottom, 2 at top, and varies linearly on the sides.
integ. error: 0.0194898 integ. error: 0.00313874
(b) Size is 1 at bottom, 10 at top, and varies linearly on the sides.
integ. error: 0.034417 integ. error: 0.00328246
(c) Size is 4 on the inside and 1 on the outside.
integ. error: 0.891866 integ. error: 0.100973
(d) Size is 1 on the inside, 2 on the left outside and 1 on the left outside.
integ. error: 0.172476 integ. error: 0.019616
Figure 8: Comparison of smooth frame fields and integrable frame fields when sizes are imposed on boundaries. For
each frame field the corresponding parametrization is illustrated, and a quad mesh is computed using guidance
from the integrable frame field. All frame fields are isotropic. For cases (a) and (b) we also illustrate the
polynomials pT(θ) corresponding to the frames.
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 11 =====
Isotropic frames Anisotropic frames
einteg = 0.003 einteg = 0.001
einteg = 0.016 einteg = 0.002
einteg = 0.035 einteg = 0.009
Figure 9: Seamless parametrizations computed for var-
ious models, including the nautilus (bottom) in the
isotropic and anisotropic settings. einteg denotes the
integration error. Boundary size conditions are
(top) 1 at bottom and 2 at top,
(middle) 1 on inner boundary and 2 on outer boundary,
(bottom) 1 on inner and outer boundaries.
parametrizations to be very anisotropic, even though
the frames are fully isotropic. On the other hand,
the integrable frame fields have a set of singularities
that ensure the size transitions, and this is reflected in
the parametrizations where the isolines remain globally
isotropic and have the correct sizes at the boundaries.
We also see on testcase (d) that the solver is able to
represent abrupt size transitions through a tight pair of
singularities.
Singularities. These results also exhibit how the
field of tensors behaves in the vicinity of singularities.
As expected, the tensors become non-odeco as they nar-
row the singularities; this allows the solver to represent
singularities in a way that is not too costly in terms of
integrability energy. However it also brings a limitation:
as the tensors are not odeco, the assumptions needed
for the integrability energy fail, causing the frame field
to not be exactly integrable close to singularities. In
practice, one needs to tune parameter ϵ to achieve an
appropriate trade-off between singularity cost and inte-
grability.
Isotropic vs anisotropic frames. Figure 9 com-
pares the isotropic and anisotropic frame fields ob-
tained with our solvers on additional examples. The
anisotropic solver produces a very distinct singular-
ity configuration compared to the isotropic solver, and
achieves a much smaller integration error thanks to the
additional degrees of freedom.
Limit cycles. Conventional frame field-driven
quad meshing methods fail due to the presence of limit
cycles in the frame field, which are the consequence of
a non-meshable topology. A standard test case where a
limit cycle appears is the nautilus model, for which we
show our results on Figure 9, bottom. Our method suc-
cessfully produces singularity configurations the are free
of limit cycles, and a valid quad mesh can be extracted.
Existence of integrable frame fields. Given a
set of boundary conditions, an exactly integrable frame
field does not exist in general; in our case, by imposing
sizes strongly on the boundaries, an integrable isotropic
frame field very often does not exist. We refer to [9] and
the Abel-Jacobi framework for a complete treatment
of these aspects. The non-existence of an integrable
frame field can explain why a Lie bracket of zero is
not achievable. Moreover, the smaller integration error
achieved by allowing anisotropic frames (as illustrated
in Figure 9) shows that the boundary conditions truly
obstruct the integrability. This can be alleviated either
by relaxing the boundary conditions or the isotropy
constraint.
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 12 =====
8 Conclusion and F uture W ork
In this work, we have shown how to leverage the theory
of orthogonally decomposable tensors to produce inte-
grable frame fields. We have studied the tensor eigen-
value perturbation problem and found simple expres-
sions for the eigenvalue sensitivity of tensors. This re-
sult enables us to write a frame field's Lie bracket (and
thus, the integrability optimization problem) solely in
terms of its tensor representation. The integrable frame
field can be integrated to a seamless parametrization
of which we have full control over size and orientation
through the frame field optimization; this is a feature
that is often overlooked in field-based meshing meth-
ods. We believe this contribution is an important step
towards a robust, flexible (in terms of size and orienta-
tion prescriptions) and optimal quadrilateral mesher.
Integrable non-odeco fields. An important lim-
itation of our approach is that the tensor field is as-
sumed to be odeco for the Lie bracket expression to be
valid. This causes the frame field to not be exactly inte-
grable near singularities. A possible solution for this is
to remove the odeco assumption when writing out the
eigenvalue perturbation problem. This makes it possi-
ble to write a Lie bracket that remains valid even if the
tensor field is non-odeco (at least in the isotropic case).
The price to pay is that the integrability condition be-
comes a more complex, rational expression of the tensor
coefficients. We leave the investigation of this approach
for future work.
The 3D case. The major advantage of our
methodology is that it offers a natural extension to com-
pute 3D integrable frame fields; indeed, the theory of
odeco tensors, as well as the results on eigenvalue sen-
sitivity, remain valid in arbitrary dimensions. The only
obstacle remaining is to express the integrability con-
dition in terms of the algebraic frame representation
We are confident that a solution can be found in future
work.
Acknowledgments
Matt´ eo Couplet is a Fellow of the Belgian Fund for
Scientific Research (F.R.S.-FNRS).
Appendix A Eigenvalue sensitivity for odeco
tensors
Let T be a fully symmetric fourth-order orthogo-
nally decomposable tensor of dimension n, i.e., T =Pn
i=1 λiˆ v4
i , or, in index notation,
(1.35) Tj1j2j3j4 = λiˆvi,j1 ˆvi,j2 ˆvi,j3 ˆvi,j4 ,
with orthogonal unit vectors ˆ vi. Consider the contrac-
tion of T with one of its eigenvectors, ˆ vk:
(1.36)
Tj1j2j3j4 ˆvk,j4 = λiˆvi,j1 ˆvi,j2 ˆvi,j3 ˆvi,j4 ˆvk,j4 ,
= λiˆvi,j1 ˆvi,j2 ˆvi,j3 δik
= λk ˆvk,j1 ˆvk,j2 ˆvk,j3 ,
or, written compactly, Tˆ vk = λkˆ v3
k. Contracting
again and following the same procedure we find that
Tˆ v2
k = λkˆ v2
k and Tˆ v3
k = λkˆ vk, the latter being the
definition of a tensor eigenvector. Consider now a
specific eigenpair ( λ, w), with w having unit norm. We
wish to express the variation of the eigenpair ( δλ, δw)
given some perturbation of the tensor δT. We write the
remainder of the proof in compact notation for brevity
but the same steps can be performed in index notation.
Since the eigenvectors have unit norm, any eigenvector
is orthogonal to its variation:
(1.37) ( w + δw) · (w + δw) = 1 ⇒ w · δw = 0,
neglecting the higher-order terms (δw·δw). Writing the
eigenvector definition Tw3 = λw for the new eigenpair,
we find
(1.38)
(T + δT)(w + δw)3 = λw + δ(λw)
Tw3 + 3Tw2δw + δTw3 = λw + δ(λw)
3λw2δw + δTw3 = δ(λw)
We have used, respectively, the eigenvector definition,
the contraction property Tw2 = λw2 and the orthog-
onality property w · δw = 0. This gives the desired
sensitivity expression.
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
===== page 13 =====
References
[1] Pierre-Alexandre Beaufort, Jonathan Lambrechts,
Fran¸ cois Henrotte, Christophe Geuzaine, and Jean-
Fran¸ cois Remacle. Computing cross fields A PDE ap-
proach based on the Ginzburg-Landau theory.Procedia
Engineering, 203:219-231, 2017.
[2] David Bommes, Henrik Zimmer, and Leif Kobbelt.
Mixed-integer quadrangulation. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 28(3):77:1-77:10, July 2009.
[3] Marcel Campen, David Bommes, and Leif Kobbelt.
Quantized global parametrization. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 34(6):1-12, November 2015.
[4] Alexandre Chemin, Fran¸ cois Henrotte, Jean-Fran¸ cois
Remacle, and Jean Van Schaftingen. Representing
Three-Dimensional Cross Fields Using Fourth Order
Tensors. In Xevi Roca and Adrien Loseille, edi-
tors, 27th International Meshing Roundtable , volume
127, pages 89-108. Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 2019.
[5] Keenan Crane, Mathieu Desbrun, and Peter Schr¨ oder.
Trivial Connections on Discrete Surfaces. Computer
Graphics Forum, 29(5):1525-1533, September 2010.
[6] Olga Diamanti, Amir Vaxman, Daniele Panozzo, and
Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Designing N -PolyVector
Fields with Complex Polynomials. Computer Graph-
ics Forum, 33(5):1-11, August 2014.
[7] Olga Diamanti, Amir Vaxman, Daniele Panozzo, and
Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Integrable PolyVector fields.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, 34(4):1-12, July 2015.
[8] Jin Huang, Yiying Tong, Hongyu Wei, and Hujun Bao.
Boundary aligned smooth 3D cross-frame field. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, 30(6):1-8, December 2011.
[9] Jovana Jezdimirovi´ c, Alexandre Chemin, and Jean-
Fran¸ cois Remacle. Integrable cross-field generation
based on imposed singularity configuration - the 2D
manifold case -, September 2022.
[10] Felix K¨ alberer, Matthias Nieser, and Konrad Polthier.
QuadCover - Surface Parameterization using Branched
Coverings. Computer Graphics Forum , 26(3):375-384,
2007.
[11] Felix Kn¨ oppel, Keenan Crane, Ulrich Pinkall, and
Peter Schr¨ oder. Globally optimal direction fields.
ACM Transactions on Graphics, 32(4):1-10, July 2013.
[12] Nicolas Kowalski, Franck Ledoux, and Pascal Frey. A
PDE Based Approach to Multidomain Partitioning and
Quadrilateral Meshing. In Xiangmin Jiao and Jean-
Christophe Weill, editors, Proceedings of the 21st Inter-
national Meshing Roundtable , pages 137-154. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013.
[13] M. Lyon, M. Campen, and L. Kobbelt. Quad Lay-
outs via Constrained T-Mesh Quantization. Computer
Graphics Forum, 40(2):305-314, May 2021.
[14] Ashish Myles, Nico Pietroni, and Denis Zorin. Robust
field-aligned global parametrization. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics , 33(4):1-14, July 2014.
[15] Jonathan Palacios and Eugene Zhang. Rotational
symmetry field design on surfaces. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 26(3):55, July 2007.
[16] David Palmer, David Bommes, and Justin Solomon.
Algebraic Representations for Volumetric Frame
Fields. ACM Transactions on Graphics , 39(2):1-17,
April 2020.
[17] Nicolas Ray, Wan Chiu Li, Bruno L´ evy, Alla Sheffer,
and Pierre Alliez. Periodic global parameterization.
ACM Transactions on Graphics , 25(4):1460-1485, Oc-
tober 2006.
[18] Nicolas Ray, Bruno Vallet, Wan Chiu Li, and Bruno
L´ evy. N-symmetry direction field design.ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics , 27(2):1-13, April 2008.
[19] Maxence Reberol, Christos Georgiadis, and Jean-
Fran¸ cois Remacle. Quasi-structured quadrilateral
meshing in Gmsh - a robust pipeline for complex CAD
models. arXiv:2103.04652 [cs] , March 2021.
[20] Elina Robeva. Orthogonal Decomposition of Symmet-
ric Tensors. SIAM Journal on Matrix Analysis and
Applications, 37(1):86-102, January 2016.
[21] Andrew O. Sageman-Furnas, Albert Chern, Mirela
Ben-Chen, and Amir Vaxman. Chebyshev nets from
commuting PolyVector fields. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 38(6):1-16, December 2019.
[22] Amir Vaxman, Marcel Campen, Olga Diamanti,
Daniele Panozzo, David Bommes, Klaus Hildebrandt,
and Mirela Ben-Chen. Directional Field Synthesis,
Design, and Processing. Computer Graphics Forum ,
35(2):545-572, May 2016.
[23] Ryan Viertel and Braxton Osting. An Approach to
Quad Meshing Based on Harmonic Cross-Valued Maps
and the Ginzburg-Landau Theory. SIAM Journal on
Scientific Computing, 41(1):A452-A479, January 2019.
Copyright © 2023 by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited