
===== page 1 =====
GEOMETRY  
Break the geometry bottleneck 
to  reduce modeling time  
Preparing CAD geometry for meshing  
consumes more time and resources than any  
other stage of the CAE process. Cubit provides  
powerful, user-guided automated tools to  
make geometry cleanup and simpli
fication fast  
and satisfying.  
Build solid geometry directly or import CAD 
Create solid geometry directly in Cubit, or  
import geometry from leading CAD platforms.  
Modify with transform or Boolean operations.   
Auto-heal dirty CAD  
Geometry analysis and repair tools diagnose  
and fix geometric and topological errors from  
imported CAD by trimming, stitching, and  
rebuilding.  
Clean up and defeature with smart tools 
User-guided, automated routines detect and  
remove undesirable features such as 
fillets,  
chamfers, and sliver curves and surfaces.  
MESHING  
Mesh any CAD geometry with robust  
hex and tet algorithms  
Coreform Cubit supplies a comprehensive  
meshing feature-set for surface and solid  
meshing with a wide variety of element types  
and methods for automating and streamlin ing 
mesh creation.  
Battle-tested algorithms  
Deep stock of mesh generation algorithms  
including paving, mapping, sub-mapping,  
sweeping and multi-sweeping.  
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS OS Windows 7 or newer, 64-bit; Red Hat 7, 64-bit (or similar  
system with at least glibc 2.5 and libstdc++ 4.4); SUSE 12; Debian 6; Ubuntu 10.4 or  
newer; Mac 10.11+, 64 bit only. Hardware 4GB RAM (8GB or more recommended),  
1GB disk space. Graphics card and driver capable of supporting OpenGL 3.2.   
 
A comprehensive toolset for  
streamlined geometry cleanup  and 
mesh generation  
Coreform Cubit includes everything needed  for 
streamlined progress from CAD to analysis,  with 
full-featured capabilities for geometry  
preparation and mesh generation, analysis,  and 
fine-tuning.  
Key Features & Capabilities  
Comprehensive toolset  
Everything you need for fast geometry  
cleanup, meshing, and export.  
Semi-automated hex meshing  
Rich set of tools for streamlining the   
creation of analysis-ready models  
Expert-level mesh control  
Industry-leading mesh analysis and   
improvement tools for complete   
control from Jacobians to vertices.  
Scripting & automation  
Python integration and scripting tools  
to increase simulation speed and   
throughput  
Smart workflow wizard  
Step-by-step guidance through geome 
try preparation and mesh generation.  
Smart controls  
User-guided adaptive or fully automatic  
interval sizing and scheme selection.  
Unrivaled hex meshing  
State-of-the-art structured and unstructured  
quad- and hex-dominant meshing with  
powerful, smart automation options.  
Multi-scheme tet meshing  
Multi-scheme automatic tri/tet meshing  
schemes with Distene MeshGems, Delaunay,  
and advancing front algorithms.  
www.coreform.com 

===== page 2 =====
AUTOMATION  
Semi-automated hex meshing with  
interactive smart tools  
Smart workflow wizard  
Step-by-step guidance through geometry  
preparation and mesh generation, with user 
interactive diagnostics and smart   
suggestions.  
Smart sweep suggestion & forcing 
Automatic recognition of nearly sweepable  
topologies and identi
fication of potential  
source-target pairs. Automatic surface 
compositing to force a sweep topology.  
Smart decomposition  
Smart detection/suggestion of decomposition  
operations needed to enable mapping,  
sub-mapping or sweeping schemes.  
Autoscheme hex meshing  
Automatic meshing scheme selection based  
on user-adjustable topological and geometric  
criteria.  
Imprint & merge   
Unique suite of interactive, automated tools  
to enable efficient and robust conformal  
meshing of multi-volume assemblies.  
CONTROL  
Expert-level mesh controls for  
superior quality and precision  
Industry-leading capabilities for specifying  
mesh properties, analyzing mesh quality, and  
performing precise local or global mesh  
modi
fications.  
Mesh quality analysis and visualization  
Quality analysis with general and   
element-type-specific metrics for quad, tri,  
tet, hex, and wedge elements, including  
aspect ratio, area/volume, min/max angle,  
Jacobians, condition number, distortion, and  
approximate maximum timestep (for explicit  
transient dynamics).  
Mesh property controls   
Adaptivity and sizing function options for  
controlling mesh density in response to  
geometric or user-de
fined properties,  including 
local field variable solution values  from 
previous analyses. User-specified fixed or  
variable-firmness interval sizing, including arc  
span and curve biasing.  
Mesh smoothing and optimization  
Smoothing algorithms: equipotential,  
condition-number optimizing, length 
weighted and smart Laplacian, Winslow   
elliptic. Mean ratio and edge length   
smoothing provided by MESQUITE, a mesh  
optimization toolkit by Argonne National  
Laboratory and Sandia National Laboratories.  
Mesh refinement and scaling  
Multiple methods for global or local conformal  
refinement with automatically generated  
transition elements per user specification,  
including pillowing and directional sheet  
operations to reduce or create anisotropy.  
SCRIPTING  
Powerful scripting & process  
automation for maximum   
simulation throughput  
Replayable journal files  
All GUI input is automatically echoed to the  
command line and saved as an editable,  
replayable journal 
file.  
Python scripting  
Scripting functionality is available directly via  
the command line with a built-in Python  
interpreter, or via 
file input for batch mode  
operation.  
GUI and tool customization  
Journaled command sequences and Python  
scripts can be launched with user-created,  
importable custom command buttons and  
toolbars.  
Integration via SDK  
Available SDK allows deep customization for  
seamless custom workflow integration via  
Python or C++.  

===== page 3 =====
© 2021 Coreform LLC  
1427 South 550 East  
Orem UT 84097 USA  
Telephone +1 801 717 2296 www.coreform.com 
